Overall sentences annotated: 5415

Agreement:
4535 sentences with 0 annotators agreed
492 sentences with 1 annotators agreed
191 sentences with 2 annotators agreed
100 sentences with 3 annotators agreed
40 sentences with 4 annotators agreed
26 sentences with 5 annotators agreed
19 sentences with 6 annotators agreed
5 sentences with 7 annotators agreed
6 sentences with 8 annotators agreed
1 sentences with 9 annotators agreed

Accumulated Agreement:
880 sentences with at least 1 annotators agreed
388 sentences with at least 2 annotators agreed
197 sentences with at least 3 annotators agreed
97 sentences with at least 4 annotators agreed
57 sentences with at least 5 annotators agreed
31 sentences with at least 6 annotators agreed
12 sentences with at least 7 annotators agreed
7 sentences with at least 8 annotators agreed
1 sentences with at least 9 annotators agreed

Sentences with 9 agreed annotators:
She wants to go to a single-payer plan, which would be a disaster, somewhat similar to Canada.

Sentences with 8 agreed annotators:
Well, you owe the president an apology, because as you know very well, your campaign, Sidney Blumenthal -- he's another real winner that you have -- and he's the one that got this started, along with your campaign manager, and they were on television just two weeks ago, she was, saying exactly that.
As an example, in San Bernardino, many people saw the bombs all over the apartment of the two people that killed 14 and wounded many, many people.
I was against -- I was against the war in Iraq.
How do you miss $6 billion?
You ran the State Department, $6 billion was either stolen.
It's gone, $6 billion.

Sentences with 7 agreed annotators:
When I watch the deals being made, when I watch what's happening with some horrible things like Obamacare, where your health insurance and health care is going up by numbers that are astronomical, 68 percent, 59 percent, 71 percent, when I look at the Iran deal and how bad a deal it is for us, it's a one-sided transaction where we're giving back $150 billion to a terrorist state, really, the number one terror state, we've made them a strong country from really a very weak country just three years ago.
Her client she represented got him off, and she's seen laughing on two separate occasions, laughing at the girl who was raped.
No, there wasn't check out a sex tape.
Well, first of all, those stories have been largely debunked.
I do not add a penny to the national debt.

Sentences with 6 agreed annotators:
Well, for one thing -- and before we start on that -- my father gave me a very small loan in 1975, and I built it into a company that's worth many, many billions of dollars, with some of the greatest assets in the world, and I say that only because that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
Independent experts have looked at what I've proposed and looked at what Donald's proposed, and basically they've said this, that if his tax plan, which would blow up the debt by over $5 trillion and would in some instances disadvantage middle-class families compared to the wealthy, were to go into effect, we would lose 3.5 million jobs and maybe have another recession.
Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese.
I do not say that.
No wonder you've been fighting -- no wonder you've been fighting ISIS your entire adult life.
They were pressing it very hard.
She worked a tough negotiation with nations around the world to eliminate the Iranian nuclear weapons program without firing a shot.
Richard Nixon released tax returns when he was under audit.
Less than ten cents on the dollar in the Clinton Foundation has gone to charitable causes.
Less than 10 cents on the dollar of the Clinton Foundation has gone to charitable causes.
Last year, we had almost $800 billion trade deficit.
Hillary Clinton attacked those same women and attacked them viciously.
After a year-long investigation, there is no evidence that anyone hacked the server I was using and there is no evidence that anyone can point to at all -- anyone who says otherwise has no basis -- that any classified material ended up in the wrong hands.
And I will tell you, Hillary Clinton is raising your taxes, folks.
In the days after the first debate, you sent out a series of tweets from 3 a.m. to 5 a.m., including one that told people to check out a sex tape.
I also will not add a penny to the debt.
That's why what I have put forward doesn't add a penny to the debt, but it is the kind of approach that will enable more people to take those new jobs, higher-paying jobs.
Just like when you ran the State Department, $6 billion was missing.
But what is really troubling is that we learned in the last debate he has not paid a penny in federal income tax.

Sentences with 5 agreed annotators:
Thousands of jobs leaving Michigan, leaving Ohio.
I did not.
I did not.
You even at one time suggested that you would try to negotiate down the national debt of the United States.
No, you're wrong.
Murders are up.
Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine want to continue the policies of open borders, amnesty, catch and release, sanctuary cities, all the things that are driving -- that are driving wages down in this country, Senator, and also too often with criminal aliens in the country, it's bringing heartbreak.
I mean, to be honest with you, if Donald Trump had said all of the things that you've said he said in the way you said he said them, he still wouldn't have a fraction of the insults that Hillary Clinton leveled when she said that half of our supporters were a basket of deplorables.
We had an $800 billion deficit.
But what President Clinton did, he was impeached, he lost his license to practice law.
He had to pay an $850,000 fine to one of the women.
There has never been anything like this, where e-mails -- and you get a subpoena, you get a subpoena, and after getting the subpoena, you delete 33,000 e-mails, and then you acid wash them or bleach them, as you would say, very expensive process.
First of all, Captain Khan is an American hero, and if I were president at that time, he would be alive today, because unlike her, who voted for the war without knowing what she was doing, I would not have had our people in Iraq.
But, you know, let's talk about what's really going on here, Martha, because our intelligence community just came out and said in the last few days that the Kremlin, meaning Putin and the Russian government, are directing the attacks, the hacking on American accounts to influence our election.
They're doing it to try to influence the election for Donald Trump.
She's raising your taxes really high.
But she is raising everybody's taxes massively.
I don't like Assad at all, but Assad is killing ISIS.
Russia is killing ISIS.
Because NAFTA, signed by her husband, is perhaps the greatest disaster trade deal in the history of the world.
Ambassador Stevens -- Ambassador Stevens sent 600 requests for help.
But it's not OK with me, because based on what she's saying, and based on where she's going, and where she's been, you can take the baby and rip the baby out of the womb in the ninth month on the final day.
She wants to have open borders.
He used undocumented labor to build the Trump Tower.
She wants 550 percent more people than Barack Obama, and he has thousands and thousands of people.
They don't know.

Sentences with 4 agreed annotators:
The facts are -- I did say I hoped it would be a good deal, but when it was negotiated...
And we have a Fed that's doing political things.
Wrong.
It went before a judge, who was a very against-police judge.
Sidney Blumenthal works for the campaign and close -- very close friend of Secretary Clinton.
I know Donald's very praiseworthy of Vladimir Putin, but Putin is playing a really...
Wrong.
I did not support the war in Iraq.
And Iraq has been overrun by ISIS, because Hillary Clinton failed to renegotiate...
First, Donald Trump said wages are too high.
Donald Trump wrote a book and he said Social Security is a Ponzi scheme and privatization would be good for all of us.
But Governor Pence said, inarguably, Vladimir Putin is a better leader than President Obama.
No, I didn't say that at all.
So you can say any way you want to say it, but Bill Clinton was abusive to women.
One of the women, who is a wonderful woman, at 12 years old, was raped at 12.
But when you talk about apology, I think the one that you should really be apologizing for and the thing that you should be apologizing for are the 33,000 e-mails that you deleted, and that you acid washed, and then the two boxes of e-mails and other things last week that were taken from an office and are now missing.
But she wants to go to single payer, which means the government basically rules everything.
But I notice, anytime anything wrong happens, they like to say the Russians are -- she doesn't know if it's the Russians doing the hacking.
Maybe there is no hacking.
No, I wasn't.
I was gone.
And Iran is killing ISIS.
You know, because it sounds like you're in the business or you're aware of people in the business -- you know that we are now for the first time ever energy-independent.
And so when I think about what we need to do, we have 33,000 people a year who die from guns.
In Chicago, which has the toughest gun laws in the United States, probably you could say by far, they have more gun violence than any other city.
If you go with what Hillary is saying, in the ninth month, you can take the baby and rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth of the baby.
The border -- as you know, the Border Patrol agents, 16,500-plus ICE last week, endorsed me.
Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
But Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
He underpaid undocumented workers, and when they complained, he basically said what a lot of employers do: "You complain, I'll get you deported."
... that the Russians have engaged in cyberattacks against the United States of America, that you encouraged espionage against our people, that you are willing to spout the Putin line, sign up for his wish list, break up NATO, do whatever he wants to do, and that you continue to get help from him, because he has a very clear favorite in this race.
She has no idea whether it's Russia, China, or anybody else.
Well, first of all, before I start on my plan, her plan is going to raise taxes and even double your taxes.
We're not making things anymore, relatively speaking.
She gave us ISIS, because her and Obama created this huge vacuum, and a small group came out of that huge vacuum because when -- we should never have been in Iraq, but once we were there, we should have never got out the way they wanted to get out.
I did not say that.
I did not say that.
But I will tell you what isn't fictionalized are her e-mails, where she destroyed 33,000 e-mails criminally, criminally, after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
It's -- the premiums are going up 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent.
Next year they're going to go up over 100 percent.

Sentences with 3 agreed annotators:
Our jobs are fleeing the country.
They're going to Mexico.
So Ford is leaving.
You called it the gold standard.
You called it the gold standard of trade deals.
And by the way, my tax cut is the biggest since Ronald Reagan.
The Fed is doing political -- by keeping the interest rates at this level.
When we have a country that's doing so badly, that's being ripped off by every single country in the world, it's the kind of thinking that our country needs, because everybody -- Lester, we have a trade deficit with all of the countries that we do business with, of almost $800 billion a year.
Or maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes, because the only years that anybody's ever seen were a couple of years when he had to turn them over to state authorities when he was trying to get a casino license, and they showed he didn't pay any federal income tax.
And when we talk about your business, you've taken business bankruptcy six times.
In Chicago, they've had thousands of shootings, thousands since January 1st.
It was taken away from her.
And our mayor, our new mayor, refused to go forward with the case.
They would have won an appeal.
But stop-and- frisk had a tremendous impact on the safety of New York City.
Blumenthal sent McClatchy, highly respected reporter at McClatchy, to Kenya to find out about it.
Well, nobody was pressing it, nobody was caring much about it.
In addition, I was just endorsed by ICE.
Well, President Obama and Secretary Clinton created a vacuum the way they got out of Iraq, because they got out -- what, they shouldn't have been in, but once they got in, the way they got out was a disaster.
He actually advocated for the actions we took in Libya and urged that Gadhafi be taken out, after actually doing some business with him one time.
We have not been updating from the new standpoint.
But this is a man who has called women pigs, slobs and dogs, and someone who has said pregnancy is an inconvenience to employers, who has said...
We've seen an economy stifled by more taxes, more regulation, a war on coal, and a failing health care reform come to be known as Obamacare, and the American people know that we need to make a change.
And as a candidate, he started his campaign with a speech where he called Mexicans rapists and criminals, and he has pursued the discredited and really outrageous lie that President Obama wasn't born in the United States.
The Clinton Foundation accepted foreign contributions from foreign governments and foreign donors while she was secretary of state.
Eliminate the Iranian nuclear weapons program?
Absolutely, without firing a shot.
Hillary Clinton -- Hillary Clinton -- Hillary Clinton failed to renegotiate a status of forces agreement...
It was a failure of the secretary of state...
I think the fact that -- that under this past administration was of which Hillary Clinton was a part, we've almost doubled the national debt is atrocious.
But a trillion dollars in tax increases, more regulation, more of the same war on coal, and more of Obamacare that now even former President Bill Clinton calls Obamacare a crazy plan.
They want to expand it into a single-payer program.
And both Donald Trump and Mike Pence think we ought to eliminate the federal minimum wage.
Fifteen million new jobs?
And when Congressman Pence was in Congress, he was the chief cheerleader for the privatization of Social Security.
You did ask this question about debt, and the debt explosion on the Trump plan is much, much bigger than anything on the Clinton side.
Senator, when African-American police officers involved in a police action shooting involving an African-American, why would Hillary Clinton accuse that African-American police officer of implicit bias?
He attacked an Indiana-born federal judge and said he was unqualified to hear a federal lawsuit because his parents were Mexican.
He went after John McCain, a POW, and said he wasn't hero because he'd been captured.
He said African-Americans are living in Hell.
And he perpetrated this outrageous and bigoted lie that President Obama is not a U.S. citizen.
They want to go house to house, school to school, business to business, and kick out 16 million people.
That's nonsense.
He's said Saudi Arabia should get them, Japan should get them, Korea should get them.
Elaine, the director of the FBI, our homeland security, said we can't know for certain who these people are coming from Syria.
And a Republican FBI director did an investigation and concluded that...
That is absolutely inaccurate.
He said he's stronger -- he's been stronger on the world stage.
And then we found, thanks to the good work of the Associated Press, that more than half her private meetings when she was secretary of state were given to major donors of the Clinton Foundation.
Donald Trump and I would never support legislation that punished women who made the heartbreaking choice to end a pregnancy.
He also said and many of them are good people.
I heard them when they were running for the Senate in New York, where Hillary was going to bring back jobs to upstate New York and she failed.
Muslims have to report the problems when they see them.
First, we've had Muslims in America since George Washington.
And Hillary Clinton wants to allow a 550 percent increase over Obama.
People are coming into our country like we have no idea who they are, where they are from, what their feelings about our country is, and she wants 550 percent more.
And the final thing I would say, this is the 10th or 12th time that he's denied being for the war in Iraq.
That's not been debunked.
Has not been debunked.
"As I recall, that was something I said about Abraham Lincoln after having seen the wonderful Steven Spielberg movie called ""Lincoln."""
And a lot of it has to do with the fact that our taxes are so high, just about the highest in the world.
And it is sort of amusing to hear somebody who hasn't paid federal income taxes in maybe 20 years talking about what he's going to do.
And, indeed, the way that he talks about his tax cuts would end up raising taxes on middle-class families, millions of middle-class families.
And I think it's been unfortunate, but it's happened, that since the Great Recession, the gains have all gone to the top.
I mean, her and Obama, whether you like it or not, the way they got out of Iraq, the vacuum they've left, that's why ISIS formed in the first place.
Eight million kids every year have health insurance, because when I was first lady I worked with Democrats and Republicans to create the Children's Health Insurance Program.
When I was secretary of state, I went around the world advocating for our country, but also advocating for women's rights, to make sure that women had a decent chance to have a better life and negotiated a treaty with Russia to lower nuclear weapons.
First of all, she was there as secretary of state with the so-called line in the sand, which...
And, by the way, ISIS has a good chunk of their oil.
It stripped us of manufacturing jobs.
I ask Hillary, why doesn't -- she made $250 million by being in office.
She used the power of her office to make a lot of money.
Hillary Clinton wants to put all the miners out of business.
Something happened recently where Justice Ginsburg made some very, very inappropriate statements toward me and toward a tremendous number of people, many, many millions of people that I represent.
And she was forced to apologize.
I believe if my opponent should win this race, which I truly don't think will happen, we will have a Second Amendment which will be a very, very small replica of what it is right now.
And what I was saying that you referenced, Chris, was that I disagreed with the way the court applied the Second Amendment in that case, because what the District of Columbia was trying to do was to protect toddlers from guns and so they wanted people with guns to safely store them.
So we have the toughest laws, and you have tremendous gun violence.
And, indeed, he said women should be punished, that there should be some form of punishment for women who obtain abortions.
Well, first of all, she wants to give amnesty, which is a disaster and very unfair to all of the people that are waiting on line for many, many years.
All of the problems -- the single biggest problem is heroin that pours across our southern border.
The NAFTA deal signed by her husband is one of the worst deals ever made of any kind, signed by anybody.
Hillary Clinton fought for the wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
President Obama has moved millions of people out.
But under Obama, millions of people have been moved out of this country.
They have no idea where they come from.
I don't know Putin.
And our country has no idea.
... advocated more countries getting them, Japan, Korea, even Saudi Arabia.
I didn't say nuclear.
Last week, as you know, the end of last week, they came out with an anemic jobs report.
We've lost our jobs.
We've lost our businesses.
I started with a $1 million loan.
Well, he held a number of big rallies where he said that he could not possibly have done those things to those women because they were not attractive enough for them to be assaulted.
The money goes 100 percent -- 100 percent goes to different charities, including a lot of military.
the money -- the money went to Fisher House, where they build houses -- the money that you're talking about went to Fisher House, where they build houses for veterans and disabled vets.
And all of her donors -- just about all of them -- I know Buffett took hundreds of millions of dollars, Soros, George Soros, took hundreds of millions of dollars...
If you look -- excuse me, Chris -- if you look at your voter rolls, you will see millions of people that are registered to vote -- millions, this isn't coming from me -- this is coming from Pew Report and other places -- millions of people that are registered to vote that shouldn't be registered to vote.
Wrong.

Sentences with 2 agreed annotators:
They're devaluing their currency, and there's nobody in our government to fight them.
He started his business with $14 million, borrowed from his father, and he really believes that the more you help wealthy people, the better off we'll be and that everything will work out from there.
In fact, Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis.
He's doubled it in a course of almost eight years, seven-and-a-half years, to be semi- exact.
NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere, but certainly ever signed in this country.
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax increases in history.
I think building the middle class, investing in the middle class, making college debt-free so more young people can get their education, helping people refinance their -- their debt from college at a lower rate.
Now, look, we have the worst revival of an economy since the Great Depression.
For 40 years, everyone running for president has released their tax returns.
That makes me smart.
The gun epidemic is the leading cause of death of young African- American men, more than the next nine causes put together.
We have a situation where we have our inner cities, African- Americans, Hispanics are living in he'll because it's so dangerous.
Now, whether or not in a place like Chicago you do stop and frisk, which worked very well, Mayor Giuliani is here, worked very well in New York.
It brought the crime rate way down.
If you look at it, throughout the country, there are many places where it's allowed.
Well, I've heard -- I've heard Donald say this at his rallies, and it's really unfortunate that he paints such a dire negative picture of black communities in our country.
And it's just a fact that if you're a young African-American man and you do the same thing as a young white man, you are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted, and incarcerated.
Tremendous beyond belief.
So when you say it has no impact, it really did.
It had a very, very big impact.
Well, it's also fair to say, if we're going to talk about mayors, that under the current mayor, crime has continued to drop, including murders.
No, you're wrong.
And if you look at CNN this past week, Patti Solis Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer saying that this happened.
You were after him, you were trying to -- you even sent out or your campaign sent out pictures of him in a certain garb, very famous pictures.
And that's why I was so -- I was so shocked when Donald publicly invited Putin to hack into Americans.
And ISIS was formed.
Donald supported the invasion of Iraq.
Number one, the 28 countries of NATO, many of them aren't paying their fair share.
I was against the war in Iraq.
And my successor, John Kerry, and President Obama got a deal that put a lid on Iran's nuclear program without firing a single shot.
China is totally powerful as it relates to North Korea.
"And he called this woman ""Miss Piggy."""
"Then he called her ""Miss Housekeeping,"" because she was Latina."
People are pouring into our country.
And perhaps they passed the wrong button, they pressed the wrong button, or perhaps worse than that, it was corruption, but these people that we were going to deport for good reason ended up becoming citizens.
Ended up becoming citizens.
And it was 800.
And now it turns out it might be 1,800, and they don't even know.
Well, first off, thank you, Elaine, and thank you to -- thank you to Norwood University for their wonderful hospitality and the Commission on Presidential Debates.
At a time when literally, in the wake of Hillary Clinton's tenure as secretary of state, where she was the architect of the Obama administration's foreign policy, we see entire portions of the world, particularly the wider Middle East, literally spinning out of control.
These guys have praised Vladimir Putin as a great leader.
She had a Clinton Foundation accepting contributions from foreign governments.
And so we removed -- we removed all of our...
... troops from Iraq, and ISIS was able to be conjured up in that vacuum.
... and overrun vast areas of Iraq.
Governor, President Bush said we would leave Iraq at the end of 2011.
And, Elaine, Iraq didn't want our troops to stay, and they wouldn't give us the protection for our troops.
And guess what?
If a nation where our troops are serving does not want us to stay, we're not going to stay without their protection.
The state of Indiana has balanced budgets.
In the state of Indiana, we've cut unemployment in half; unemployment doubled when he was governor.
But Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine want to build on Obamacare.
Look, Donald Trump and I have a plan to get this economy moving again just the way that it worked in the 1980s, just the way it worked in the 1960s, and that is by lowering taxes across the board for working families, small businesses and family farms, ending the war on coal that is hurting jobs and hurting this economy even here in Virginia, repealing Obamacare lock, stock, and barrel, and repealing all of the executive orders that Barack Obama has signed that are stifling economic growth in this economy.
The problem with this, Elaine, is that's exactly what we did 10 years ago and it put the economy into the deepest recession -- the deepest recession since the 1930s.
Independent analysts say the Clinton plan would grow the economy by 10.5 million jobs.
There are millions more people living in poverty today than the day that Barack Obama with Hillary Clinton at his side...
He created a runway -- because he's created a business that's worth billions of dollars today.
Donald Trump started this campaign in 2014 and he said, "If I run for president, I will absolutely release my taxes."
And he will.
Look, Donald Trump has filed over 100 pages of financial disclosure, which is what the law requires.
We will never, ever engage in a risky scheme to privatize Social Security.
You're not going to cut taxes.
You're going to raise taxes on the middle class.
But Hillary Clinton actually referred to that moment as an example of implicit bias in the police force, where -- where she used -- when she was asked in the debate a week ago whether there was implicit bias in law enforcement, her only answer was that there's implicit bias in everyone in the United States.
But he had been stopped by police 40 or 50 times before that fatal incident.
And if you look at sentencing in this country, African-Americans and Latinos get sentenced for the same crimes at very different rates.
Donald Trump during his campaign has called Mexicans rapists and criminals.
He's called women slobs, pigs, dogs, disgusting.
Donald Trump's laid out a plan to end illegal immigration once and for all in this country.
You will look in vain to see Donald Trump ever taking responsibility for anybody and apologizing.
Hillary and I believe in comprehensive immigration reform.
These guys -- and Donald Trump have said it -- deportation force.
When Donald Trump spoke in Phoenix, he looked the audience in the eye and he said, no, we're building a wall, and we're deporting everybody.
He said, quote, "They will all be gone."
And this is one of these ones where you can just go to the tape on it and see what Donald Trump has said.
And last and most dangerously, Donald Trump believes -- Donald Trump believes that the world will be safer if more nations have nuclear weapons.
And when he was confronted with this, and told, wait a minute, terrorists could get those, proliferation could lead to nuclear war, here's what Donald Trump said, and I quote: "Go ahead, folks, enjoy yourselves."
Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine want to increase the Syrian refugee program by 500...
And yesterday an appellate court with three Republican judges struck down the Pence plan...
Well, he said NATO is obsolete.
Her private server was subject to being hacked by foreign...
And all investigation concluded that not one reasonable prosecutor would take any additional step.
You don't get to decide the rights and wrongs of this.
We have a justice system that does that.
Donald Trump's idea that more nations should get nuclear weapons, Saudi Arabia, Japan, South Korea.
... and the fact that they got $1.7 billion in a ransom payment...
Well, he never said that, Senator.
... we delivered $400 million in cash as a ransom payment for Americans held by the radical mullahs in Tehran.
No, he said leader.
The Trump Foundation is a private family foundation.
They give virtually every cent in the Trump Foundation to charitable causes.
But honestly, Senator, we would know a lot more about it if Hillary Clinton would just turn over the 33,000 e-mails...
The thing I would worry a little bit about is that Donald Trump owes about $650 million to banks, including the Bank of China.
And we don't think that women should be punished, as Donald Trump said they should, for making the decision to have an abortion.
You keep leaving that out of your quote.
Weakened America's place in the world after the leadership of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama on the world stage has been followed by an economy that is truly struggling, stifled by an avalanche of more taxes, more regulation, Obamacare, the war on coal, and the kind of trade deals that have put American workers in the back seat.
Yes, I think that that's a very good question, because I've heard from lots of teachers and parents about some of their concerns about some of the things that are being said and done in this campaign.
Just today, policemen was shot, two killed.
We saw him after the first debate spend nearly a week denigrating a former Miss Universe in the harshest, most personal terms.
But it's not only women, and it's not only this video that raises questions about his fitness to be our president, because he has also targeted immigrants, African- Americans, Latinos, people with disabilities, POWs, Muslims, and so many others.
There's never been anybody in the history politics in this nation that's been so abusive to women.
He never apologized to Mr. and Mrs. Khan, the Gold Star family whose son, Captain Khan, died in the line of duty in Iraq.
And Donald insulted and attacked them for weeks over their religion.
"He never apologized to the distinguished federal judge who was born in Indiana, but Donald said he couldn't be trusted to be a judge because his parents were, quote, ""Mexican."""
He never apologized to the reporter that he mimicked and mocked on national television and our children were watching.
And he never apologized for the racist lie that President Obama was not born in the United States of America.
He owes the president an apology, he owes our country an apology, and he needs to take responsibility for his actions and his words.
But for you to say that there was nothing wrong with you deleting 39,000 e-mails, again, you should be ashamed of yourself.
But here's what I don't want people to forget when we're talking about reining in the costs, which has to be the highest priority of the next president, when the Affordable Care Act passed, it wasn't just that 20 million got insurance who didn't have it before.
Right now, we are at 90 percent health insurance coverage.
President Obama said you keep your doctor, you keep your plan.
And we have to be sure that Muslims come in and report when they see something going on.
But I don't want to have, with all the problems this country has and all of the problems that you see going on, hundreds of thousands of people coming in from Syria when we know nothing about them.
And indeed, you can look at the propaganda on a lot of the terrorists sites, and what Donald Trump says about Muslims is used to recruit fighters, because they want to create a war between us.
We have it on tape.
The entire press corps has looked at it.
That has not been debunked.
We're also letting drugs pour through our southern border at a record clip.
ICE just endorsed me.
She wants amnesty for everybody.
It was a master class watching President Lincoln get the Congress to approve the 13th Amendment.
But as far as other elements of what she was saying, I don't know Putin.
As soon as I have -- first of all, I pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
I pay hundreds of millions of dollars in taxes.
But they really want the carried interest provision, which I believe Hillary's leaving.
But I will tell you that, number one, I pay tremendous numbers of taxes.
Look at what she did in Libya with Gadhafi.
I mean, she calls our people deplorable, a large group, and irredeemable.
We lost our jobs.
We lost our money.
We lost our plants.
She called it the gold standard.
And there's a lot of fear -- in fact, teachers and parents are calling it the Trump effect.
Bullying is up.
We have an increase in murder within our cities, the biggest in 45 years.
She said who is going to answer the call at 3 o'clock in the morning?
Guess what?
She didn't answer it, because when Ambassador Stevens...
Why isn't she funding, not for $100 million, but why don't you put $10 million or $20 million or $25 million or $30 million into your own campaign?
We have unbelievable -- we have found over the last seven years, we have found tremendous wealth right under our feet.
For me, that means that we need a Supreme Court that will stand up on behalf of women's rights, on behalf of the rights of the LGBT community, that will stand up and say no to Citizens United, a decision that has undermined the election system in our country because of the way it permits dark, unaccountable money to come into our electoral system.
And apologize she did.
You have been quoted as saying that the fetus has no constitutional rights.
First time they've ever endorsed a candidate.
He said as recently as a few weeks ago in Phoenix that every undocumented person would be subject to deportation.
Now, she never gets anything done, so naturally the wall wasn't built.
I want to get everybody out of the shadows, get the economy working, and not let employers like Donald exploit undocumented workers, which hurts them, but also hurts American workers.
Well, if you went on to read the rest of the sentence, I was talking about energy.
This has come from the highest levels of the Russian government, clearly, from Putin himself, in an effort, as 17 of our intelligence agencies have confirmed, to influence our election.
She wants open borders.
We have 17 -- 17 intelligence agencies, civilian and military, who have all concluded that these espionage attacks, these cyberattacks, come from the highest levels of the Kremlin and they are designed to influence our election.
She has no idea.
They create warheads, and we can't.
This is a person who has been very cavalier, even casual about the use of nuclear weapons.
Wrong.
All I said is, we have to renegotiate these agreements, because our country cannot afford to defend Saudi Arabia, Japan, Germany, South Korea, and many other places.
You're not going to find a quote from me.
By contrast, Donald's plan has been analyzed to conclude it might lose 3.5 million jobs.
But I'd like to start off where we left, because when I said Japan and Germany, and I'm -- not to single them out, but South Korea, these are very rich, powerful countries.
Since I did this -- this was a year ago -- all of a sudden, they're paying.
And I've been given a lot -- a lot of credit for it.
All of a sudden, they're starting to pay up.
But they have to pay up.
We have, during his regime, during President Obama's regime, we've doubled our national debt.
... the fact is, he's going to advocate for the largest tax cuts we've ever seen, three times more than the tax cuts under the Bush administration.
He will, through his massive tax cuts, add $20 trillion to the debt.
He has cut the deficit by two-thirds.
Secretary Clinton, I want to pursue your plan, because in many ways it is similar to the Obama stimulus plan in 2009, which has led to the slowest GDP growth since 1949.
In fact, the Trump Hotel right here in Las Vegas was made with Chinese steel.
He was getting sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination in his apartment buildings.
They hired people -- they paid them $1,500, and they're on tape saying be violent, cause fights, do bad things.
And that was now all on tape, started by her.
We have a great general, four-star general, today you read it in all of the papers, going to potentially serve five years in jail for lying to the FBI.
But he also went after a disabled reporter, mocked and mimicked him on national television.
Wrong.
People contribute, I contribute.
I don't buy boats.
I don't buy planes.
No, it was -- we put up the American flag.
They put up the American flag.
We fought for the right in Palm Beach to put up the American flag.
There was even a time when he didn't get an Emmy for his TV program three years in a row and he started tweeting that the Emmys were rigged against him.
But when she left, when she took everybody out, we lost Mosul.
About three months ago, I started reading that they want to get the leaders and they're going to attack Mosul.
I have been reading about going after Mosul now for about -- how long is it, Hillary, three months?
And Iran should write us a letter of thank you, just like the really stupid -- the stupidest deal of all time, a deal that's going to give Iran absolutely nuclear weapons.
Iran is taking over Iraq.
Iran is taking over Iraq.
... in many cases, ISIS-aligned, and we now have them in our country, and wait until you see -- this is going to be the great Trojan horse.
Our inner cities are a disaster.
You get shot walking to the store.

Sentences with 1 agreed annotators:
We're going to do it by having the wealthy pay their fair share and close the corporate loopholes.
They're going to many other countries.
You look at what China is doing to our country in terms of making our product.
You see that, their small car division leaving.
So many hundreds and hundreds of companies are doing this.
Under my plan, I'll be reducing taxes tremendously, from 35 percent to 15 percent for companies, small and big businesses.
In fact, it would be the most extreme version, the biggest tax cuts for the top percent of the people in this country than we've ever had.
You know, Donald was very fortunate in his life, and that's all to his benefit.
They're leaving, and they're leaving in bigger numbers than ever.
Well, let's stop for a second and remember where we were eight years ago.
We had the worst financial crisis, the Great Recession, the worst since the 1930s.
"He said, back in 2006, ""Gee, I hope it does collapse, because then I can go in and buy some and make some money."""
They've looked at my plans and they've said, OK, if we can do this, and I intend to get it done, we will have 10 million more new jobs, because we will be making investments where we can grow the economy.
Our energy policies are a disaster.
Our country is losing so much in terms of energy, in terms of paying off our debt.
I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s.
Incomes went up for everybody.
Manufacturing jobs went up also in the 1990s, if we're actually going to look at the facts.
When I was in the Senate, I had a number of trade deals that came before me, and I held them all to the same test.
Will they create jobs in America?
Will they raise incomes in America?
And are they good for our national security?
Some of them I voted for.
The biggest one, a multinational one known as CAFTA, I voted against.
And because I hold the same standards as I look at all of these trade deals.
When I was secretary of state, we actually increased American exports globally 30 percent.
You go to New England, you go to Ohio, Pennsylvania, you go anywhere you want, Secretary Clinton, and you will see devastation where manufacture is down 30, 40, sometimes 50 percent.
And now you want to approve Trans-Pacific Partnership.
You were totally in favor of it.
Then you heard what I was saying, how bad it is, and you said, I can't win that debate.
Well, that is just not accurate.
I was against it once it was finally negotiated and the terms were laid out.
And then you heard what I said about it, and all of a sudden you were against it.
... which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn't.
That's why I said new jobs with rising incomes, investments, not in more tax cuts that would add $5 trillion to the debt.
And people have looked at both of our plans, have concluded that mine would create 10 million jobs and yours would lose us 3.5 million jobs, and explode the debt which would have a recession.
You are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history.
You are going to drive business out.
It will create tremendous numbers of new jobs.
So we have taken the home page of my website, HillaryClinton.com, and we've turned it into a fact-checker.
So if you want to see in real-time what the facts are, please go and take a look.
... would not add a penny to the debt, and your plans would add $5 trillion to the debt.
So what they're doing is they're leaving our country, and they're, believe it or not, leaving because taxes are too high and because some of them have lots of money outside of our country.
Republicans and Democrats agree that this should be done, $2.5 trillion.
I happen to think it's double that.
It's probably $5 trillion that we can't bring into our country, Lester.
Those are the kinds of things that will really boost the economy.
I don't mind releasing -- I'm under a routine audit.
And it'll be released.
And -- as soon as the audit's finished, it will be released.
But you will learn more about Donald Trump by going down to the federal elections, where I filed a 104-page essentially financial statement of sorts, the forms that they have.
Look, I've been under audit almost for 15 years.
As far as my tax returns, you don't learn that much from tax returns.
The buildings that were in question, they said in the same report, which was -- actually, it wasn't even a bad story, to be honest with you, but the buildings are worth $3.9 billion.
And we've spent $6 trillion in the Middle East, according to a report that I just saw.
Whether it's 6 or 5, but it looks like it's 6, $6 trillion in the Middle East, we could have rebuilt our country twice.
And maybe because you haven't paid any federal income tax for a lot of years.
But on occasion, four times, we used certain laws that are there.
Under budget, ahead of schedule, saved tremendous money.
Unfortunately, race still determines too much, often determines where people live, determines what kind of education in their public schools they can get, and, yes, it determines how they're treated in the criminal justice system.
I just got today the, as you know, the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, we just -- just came in.
You walk down the street, you get shot.
Thousands of shootings.
And I'm saying, where is this?
Is this a war-torn country?
What are we doing?
And we have to stop the violence.
We have to bring back law and order.
In a place like Chicago, where thousands of people have been killed, thousands over the last number of years, in fact, almost 4,000 have been killed since Barack Obama became president, over -- almost 4,000 people in Chicago have been killed.
No, the argument is that we have to take the guns away from these people that have them and they are bad people that shouldn't have them.
These are felons.
And, in fact, violent crime is one-half of what it was in 1991.
Property crime is down 40 percent.
I'm glad that we're ending private prisons in the federal system; I want to see them ended in the state system.
I do want to bring up the fact that you were the one that brought up the words super-predator about young black youth.
And it was terminated by current mayor.
New York -- New York has done an excellent job.
And her campaign manager, Patti Doyle, went to -- during the campaign, her campaign against President Obama, fought very hard.
And you can go look it up, and you can check it out.
But, remember, Donald started his career back in 1973 being sued by the Justice Department for racial discrimination because he would not rent apartments in one of his developments to African-Americans, and he made sure that the people who worked for him understood that was the policy.
Now, as far as the lawsuit, yes, when I was very young, I went into my father's company, had a real estate company in Brooklyn and Queens, and we, along with many, many other companies throughout the country -- it was a federal lawsuit -- were sued.
We settled the suit with zero -- with no admission of guilt.
Because I settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt, but that was a lawsuit brought against many real estate firms, and it's just one of those things.
In Palm Beach, Florida, tough community, a brilliant community, a wealthy community, probably the wealthiest community there is in the world, I opened a club, and really got great credit for it.
No discrimination against African- Americans, against Muslims, against anybody.
... tough, long game here.
And one of the things he's done is to let loose cyber attackers to hack into government files, to hack into personal files, hack into the Democratic National Committee.
I do want to say that I was just endorsed -- and more are coming next week -- it will be over 200 admirals, many of them here -- admirals and generals endorsed me to lead this country.
I was just endorsed by ICE.
I was just recently endorsed -- 16,500 Border Patrol agents.
I don't think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC.
I mean, it could be Russia, but it could also be China.
You don't know who broke in to DNC.
Now, whether that was Russia, whether that was China, whether it was another country, we don't know, because the truth is, under President Obama we've lost control of things that we used to have control over.
But they wouldn't have even been formed if they left some troops behind, like 10,000 or maybe something more than that.
Or, as I've been saying for a long time, and I think you'll agree, because I said it to you once, had we taken the oil -- and we should have taken the oil -- ISIS would not have been able to form either, because the oil was their primary source of income.
And now they have the oil all over the place, including the oil -- a lot of the oil in Libya, which was another one of her disasters.
But the larger point -- and he says this constantly -- is George W. Bush made the agreement about when American troops would leave Iraq, not Barack Obama.
And the only way that American troops could have stayed in Iraq is to get an agreement from the then-Iraqi government that would have protected our troops, and the Iraqi government would not give that.
And I think we've got to have an intelligence surge, where we are looking for every scrap of information.
I haven't given lots of thought to NATO.
But two things.
Number two -- and that bothers me, because we should be asking -- we're defending them, and they should at least be paying us what they're supposed to be paying by treaty and contract.
And about four months ago, I read on the front page of the Wall Street Journal that NATO is opening up a major terror division.
And I think that's great.
And I think we should get -- because we pay approximately 73 percent of the cost of NATO.
And that was -- believe me -- I'm sure I'm not going to get credit for it -- but that was largely because of what I was saying and my criticism of NATO.
I think we have to get NATO to go into the Middle East with us, in addition to surrounding nations, and we have to knock the hell out of ISIS, and we have to do it fast, when ISIS formed in this vacuum created by Barack Obama and Secretary Clinton.
The record does not show that.
The record shows that I'm right.
When I did an interview with Howard Stern, very lightly, first time anyone's asked me that, I said, very lightly, I don't know, maybe, who knows?
I have a much better -- she spent -- let me tell you -- she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an advertising -- you know, they get Madison Avenue into a room, they put names -- oh, temperament, let's go after -- I think my strongest asset, maybe by far, is my temperament.
I have a winning temperament.
So I spent a year-and-a-half putting together a coalition that included Russia and China to impose the toughest sanctions on Iran.
He said, you know, if they taunted our sailors, I'd blow them out of the water and start another war.
He has said repeatedly that he didn't care if other nations got nuclear weapons, Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia.
He even said, well, you know, if there were nuclear war in East Asia, well, you know, that's fine...
Wrong.
Just to go down the list, we defend Japan, we defend Germany, we defend South Korea, we defend Saudi Arabia, we defend countries.
They do not pay us.
But they should be paying us, because we are providing tremendous service and we're losing a fortune.
We can't defend Japan, a behemoth, selling us cars by the million...
But Russia has been expanding their -- they have a much newer capability than we do.
I was seeing B-52s, they're old enough that your father, your grandfather could be flying them.
China should solve that problem for us.
China should go into North Korea.
One of the great giveaways of all time, of all time, including $400 million in cash.
This is one of the worst deals ever made by any country in history.
If he's going to criticize a deal that has been very successful in giving us access to Iranian facilities that we never had before, then he should tell us what his alternative would be.
I mean, can you imagine, we're defending Saudi Arabia
And with all of the money they have, we're defending them, and they're not paying?
All you have to do is speak to them.
Well, as soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina.
Whether it's the Iran deal that you're so in love with, where we gave them $150 billion back, whether it's the Iran deal, whether it's anything you can -- name -- you almost can't name a good deal.
I never said that.
We are a nation that is seriously troubled.
We're losing our jobs.
The other day, we were deporting 800 people.
We have a son deployed overseas in the Marine Corps right now.
I mean, the situation we're watching hour by hour in Syria today is the result of the failed foreign policy and the weak foreign policy that Hillary Clinton helped lead in this administration and create.
The newly emboldened -- the aggression of Russia, whether it was in Ukraine or now they're heavy-handed approach...
You guys love Russia.
You both have said -- you both have said Vladimir Putin is a better leader than the president.
He's brought an extraordinary business acumen.
And paid few taxes and lost a billion a year.
I mean, the reality is, when she was secretary of state, Senator, come on.
... keep that pay to play process out of the reach of the public.
She worked to deal with the Russians to reduce their chemical weapons stockpile.
And instead of 175,000 American troops deployed overseas, we now have 15,000.
We cut taxes, we've made record investments in education and in infrastructure, and I still finish my term with $2 billion in the bank.
He actually -- he actually tried to raise taxes by about $4 billion.
But I think he's a very fitting running mate for Hillary Clinton, because in the wake of a season where American families are struggling in this economy under the weight of higher taxes and Obamacare and the war on coal and the stifling avalanche of regulation coming out of this administration, Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine want more of the same.
And for all the world, Hillary Clinton just thinks Obamacare is a good start.
The Trump plan is a different plan.
It's a "you're fired" plan.
And there's two key elements to it.
Mike Pence, when he was in Congress, voted against raising the minimum wage above $5.15.
And he has been a one-man bulwark against minimum wage increases in Indiana.
The second component of the plan is massive tax breaks for the very top, trillions of dollars of tax breaks for people just like Donald Trump.
The Trump plan would cost 3.5 million jobs.
On that point, Governor Pence, recently the New York Times released part of Mr. Trump's 1995 tax return and reported that he could have avoided paying federal income taxes for years.
I mean, the truth of the matter is, the policies of this administration, which Hillary Clinton and Senator Kaine want to continue, have run this economy into a ditch.
We're in the...
... slowest economic recovery since the Great Depression.
And the poverty level and the median income...
... stepped into the Oval Office.
... improved dramatically between 2014 and 2015.
His tax returns -- his tax returns showed he went through a very difficult time, but he used the tax code just the way it's supposed to be used.
He's broken his first promise.
He hasn't broken his promise.
He stood on the stage last week and when Hillary said, you haven't been paying taxes, he said, "That makes me smart."
Governor Pence had to give Donald Trump his tax returns to show he was qualified to be vice president.
Donald Trump must give the American public his tax returns to show that he's qualified to be president.
And he's breaking his promise.
They're going to raise your taxes.
We're going to cut your taxes.
Senator Kaine, on the issue of Social Security, in 18 years, when the Social Security Trust Funds run out of money, you'll be 76.
Even after President Bush stopped pushing for it, Congressman Pence kept pushing for it.
And we'll look for ways to keep it solvent going forward, focusing primarily on the payroll tax cap.
We've said we're going to meet the obligations of Medicare.
Donald Trump and I are going to cut taxes.
... reform government programs so we can meet the obligations of Social Security and Medicare.
Stay on the path that your party has us on, we're going to be in a -- in a mountain range of debt.
I'm a gun-owner.
I'm a strong Second Amendment supporter.
But I've got a lot of scar tissue, because when I was governor of Virginia, there was a horrible shooting at Virginia Tech, and we learned that through that painful situation that gaps in the background record check system should have been closed and it could have prevented that crime, and so we're going to work to do things like close background record checks.
It's probably -- probably why the 330,000 members of the Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Donald Trump as the next president of the United States of America, because they see his commitment to them.
They see his commitment to law and order.
But they also -- they also hear the bad mouthing, the bad mouthing that comes from people that seize upon tragedy in the wake of police action shootings as -- as a reason to -- to use a broad brush to accuse law enforcement of -- of implicit bias or institutional racism.
Your fellow Republican, Governor Pence, Senator Tim Scott, who is African-American, recently spoke on the Senate floor.
He said he was stopped seven times by law enforcement in one year.
Well, I would suggest to you that the families that live in our inner cities that are besieged by crime...
I don't like saying that in front of my wife and my mother.
If you want to have a society where people are respected and respect laws, you can't have somebody at the top who demeans every group that he talks about.
And I just -- again, I cannot believe that Governor Pence will defend the insult-driven campaign that Donald Trump has run.
We've been talking it to death for 20 years.
It's -- she said they were irredeemable, they were not American.
Look for Donald trump apologizing to John McCain for saying he wasn't a hero...
Did he apologize for saying African-Americans are living in Hell?
Did he apologize for saying President Obama was not even a citizen of the United States?
Donald Trump proposes to deport 16 million people, 11 million who are here without documents.
Senator, we have a deportation force.
And the union for Immigrations and Customs Enforcement for the first time in their history endorsed Donald Trump to be the next president of the United States of America.
Look, what you just heard is they have a plan for open borders, amnesty.
Our plan is like Ronald Reagan's plan from 1986.
They call it comprehensive immigration reform on Capitol Hill.
The reality is that there's heartbreak and tragedy that has struck American families because people that came into this country illegally are now involved in criminal enterprise and activity.
And we don't have the resources or the will to deport them systemically.
They will all be gone.
When Donald Trump says Mexicans are rapists and criminals, Mexican immigrants, when Donald Trump says about your judge, a Hoosier judge, he said that Judge Curiel was unqualified to hear a case because his parents were Mexican, I can't imagine how you could defend that.
Donald Trump doesn't have a plan.
He said, "I have a secret plan," and then he said, "Um, I know more than all the generals about ISIL."
And then he said, "I'm going to call the generals to help me figure out a plan."
And finally he said, "I'm going to fire all the generals."
He doesn't have a plan.
The military is a disaster, John McCain's no hero, the generals need all to be fired, and I know more than them.
He's got kind of a personal Mount Rushmore, Vladimir Putin, Kim Jong-un, Moammar Gadhafi...
We've weakened America's place in the world.
And because Hillary Clinton failed to renegotiate a status of forces agreement that would have allowed some American combat troops to remain in Iraq and secure the hard fought gains the American soldier had won by 2009, ISIS was able to be literally conjured up out of the desert, and it's overrun vast areas that the American soldier had won in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Governor Pence, Mr. Trump has proposed extreme vetting of immigrants from parts of the world that export terrorism.
Or instead of you violating the Constitution by blocking people based on their national origin rather than whether they're dangerous.
These guys say all Mexicans are bad.
Mike Pence...
... put a program in place to keep them out if they're from Syria.
I will tell you, after two Syrian refugees were involved in the attack in Paris that is called Paris' 9/11, as governor of the state of Indiana, I have no higher priority than the safety and security of the people of my state.
It's, first, dramatically expanding our intelligence capacities by hiring great professionals, but also we've got some of the best intel and cyber employees in the world right here in the United States working for many of our private sector companies.
That's why Donald Trump's claim that he wants to -- that NATO is obsolete and that we need to get rid of NATO is so dangerous.
That's not his plan.
But I will also tell you that it's important in this moment to remember that Hillary Clinton had a private server in her home that had classified information on it...
... about drone strikes, e-mails from the president of the United States of America were on there.
Because the FBI did an investigation.
And they concluded that there was no reasonable prosecutor who would take it further.
Hillary Clinton's top priority when she became secretary of state was the Russian reset, the Russians reset.
After the Russian reset, the Russians invaded Ukraine and took over Crimea.
We ought to deploy a missile defense shield to the Czech Republic and Poland which Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama pulled back on out of not wanting to offend the Russians back in 2009.
Donald Trump, again and again, has praised Vladimir Putin.
And it's clear that he has business dealings with Russian oligarchs who are very connected to Putin.
The Trump campaign management team had to be fired a month or so ago because of those shadowy connections with pro-Putin forces.
Governor Pence made the odd claim, he said inarguably Vladimir Putin is a better leader than President Obama.
He persecutes LGBT folks and journalists.
And the truth of the matter is, the weak and feckless foreign policy of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama has awakened an aggression in Russia that first appeared a few years ago with their move in Georgia, now their move into Crimea, now their move into the wider Middle East.
He doesn't want to acknowledge that we stopped the Iranian nuclear weapons program.
More nations should get nuclear weapons.
Don't put words in my mouth.
Donald Trump, on the other hand, didn't know that Russia had invaded the Crimea.
He knew that.
Hillary Clinton has gone toe-to-toe with Russia to work out a deal on New START.
She got them engaged on a meaningful way to cap Iran's nuclear weapons program.
And yet she stood up to them on issues such as Syria and their invasion of Georgia.
That reset resulted in the invasion of Ukraine, after they'd infiltrated with what are called little green men, Russian soldiers that were dressing up like Ukrainian dissidents, and then they moved all the way into Crimea, took over the Crimean Peninsula.
Well, this is one where we can just kind of go to the tape on it.
And -- and -- and I just think a guy who praises...
You just said better.
John McCain said, I look in his eyes and I see KGB.
While she was secretary of state, the Clinton Foundation accepted tens of millions of dollars from foreign governments and foreign donors.
But the Clintons figured out a way to create a foundation where foreign governments and foreign donors could donate millions of dollars.
The foundation was just fined for illegally contributing foundation dollars to a political campaign of a Florida attorney general.
They made an illegal contribution, and then they tried to hide it by disguising it to somebody else.
And the person they donated to was somebody whose office was charged with investigating Trump University.
Political
Senator Kaine, if you had intelligence that North Korea was about to launch a missile, a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States, would you take preemptive action?
Often China will use their veto in the Security Council to veto a package like that.
They're starting to get worried about North Korea, too.
So they actually supported the sanctions package, even though many of the sanctions are against Chinese firms, Chinese financial institutions.
She went once famously to China and stood up at a human rights meeting and looked them in the eye and said, "Women's rights are human rights."
They didn't want her to say that, but she did.
But what I can't understand is with Hillary Clinton and now Senator Kaine at her side is to support a practice like partial-birth abortion.
And that is the fundamental difference between a Clinton-Kaine ticket and a Trump- Pence ticket that wants to punish women who make that choice.
No, it's really not.
Well, look, it's -- look, he's not a polished politician like you and Hillary Clinton.
And if you want me to go there, I'll go there.
But here's -- there is a choice, and it is a choice on life.
I couldn't be more proud to be standing with Donald Trump, who's standing for the right to life.
And I couldn't be more proud to be standing with a pro-life candidate in Donald Trump.
And I'm really amazed, Elaine, as I talk to Republican senators, how well they regard and respect Hillary Clinton.
She worked across the aisle when she was first lady to get the CHIP program passed so that 8 million low-income kids have health insurance in this country, including 150,000 in Indiana.
When I look at all of the things that I see and all of the potential that our country has, we have such tremendous potential, whether it's in business and trade, where we're doing so badly.
And this is happening on a weekly basis.
ISIS happened a number of years ago in a vacuum that was left because of bad judgment.
I have great respect for women.
Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
And I will tell you: No, I have not.
What we all saw and heard on Friday was Donald talking about women, what he thinks about women, what he does to women.
We've seen him rate women on their appearance, ranking them from one to ten.
We've seen him embarrass women on TV and on Twitter.
I've heard them where Hillary is constantly talking about the inner cities of our country, which are a disaster education-wise, jobwise, safety-wise, in every way possible.
If you look at Bill Clinton, far worse.
Mine are words, and his was action.
His was what he's done to women.
But he never apologizes for anything to anyone.
You're the one that sent the pictures around your campaign, sent the pictures around with President Obama in a certain garb.
I've gotten to see the commercials that they did on you.
And I've gotten to see some of the most vicious commercials I've ever seen of Michelle Obama talking about you, Hillary.
But if I win, I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation, because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.
She said the 33,000 e-mails had to do with her daughter's wedding, number one, and a yoga class.
Premiums have gotten too high.
But everybody else, the 170 million of us who get health insurance through our employees got big benefits.
Number four, if you're under 26, and your parents have a policy, you can be on that policy until the age of 26, something that didn't happen before.
But if we repeal it, as Donald has proposed, and start over again, all of those benefits I just mentioned are lost to everybody, not just people who get their health insurance on the exchange.
That's the highest we've ever been in our country.
Obamacare is a disaster.
And not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expensive for our country.
It's going to be one of the biggest line items very shortly.
We have to get rid of the lines around the state, artificial lines, where we stop insurance companies from coming in and competing, because they want -- and President Obama and whoever was working on it -- they want to leave those lines, because that gives the insurance companies essentially monopolies.
And if you haven't noticed the Canadians, when they need a big operation, when something happens, they come into the United States in many cases because their system is so slow.
And not only are your rates going up by numbers that nobody's ever believed, but your deductibles are going up, so that unless you get hit by a truck, you're never going to be able to use it.
And like I say, 20 million people now have health insurance.
Number two, Bernie Sanders said that Hillary Clinton has very bad judgment.
You know that, because Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare, was said -- he said it was a great lie, it was a big lie.
The whole thing was a fraud, and it doesn't work.
But when we get rid of those lines, you will have competition, and we will be able to keep pre-existing, we'll also be able to help people that can't get -- don't have money because we are going to have people protected.
Look at that horrible -- these are radical Islamic terrorists.
And she won't even mention the word and nor will President Obama.
"He won't use the term ""radical Islamic terrorism."""
She won't say the name and President Obama won't say the name.
We know nothing about their values and we know nothing about their love for our country.
But it is important for us as a policy, you know, not to say, as Donald has said, we're going to ban people based on a religion.
And they don't want them.
And Hillary Clinton, when she was secretary of state, said that's OK, we can't force it into their country.
At a record clip.
And she lied.
Now she's blaming the lie on the late, great Abraham Lincoln.
But I don't know Putin.
I know nothing about Russia.
I have no businesses there.
I have no loans from Russia.
Soros, who's a friend of hers, took a massive deduction.
Many of the people that are giving her all this money that she can do many more commercials than me gave her -- took massive deductions.
But we're bringing the tax rate down from 35 percent to 15 percent.
We're cutting taxes for the middle class.
And I will tell you, we are cutting them big league for the middle class.
That in itself is a big difference.
We have no growth in this country.
There's no growth.
We're down at 1 percent.
His plan will give the wealthy and corporations the biggest tax cuts they've ever had, more than the Bush tax cuts by at least a factor of two.
And, yes, when I was a senator, I did vote to close corporate loopholes.
See, I understand the tax code better than anybody that's ever run for president.
Hillary Clinton -- and it's extremely complex -- Hillary Clinton has friends that want all of these provisions, including they want the carried interest provision, which is very important to Wall Street people.
She's made bad judgments on Libya, on Syria, on Iraq.
After 9/11, I went to work with Republican mayor, governor and president to rebuild New York and to get health care for our first responders who were suffering because they had run toward danger and gotten sickened by it.
That's how we got a treaty reducing nuclear weapons.
We sign a peace treaty.
And those three have now lined up because of our weak foreign policy.
I think that it basically has fallen.
... for weeks -- I've been reading now for weeks about Mosul, that it's the harbor of where -- you know, between Raqqa and Mosul, this is where they think the ISIS leaders are.
And by the way, at the last debate, she lied, because it turned out that she did say the gold standard and she said she didn't say it.
Well, within hours I said that I was sorry about the way I talked about that, because my argument is not with his supporters.
African-American incomes went up 33 percent.
We have the slowest growth since 1929.
And I regret deeply that the Senate has not done its job and they have not permitted a vote on the person that President Obama, a highly qualified person, they've not given him a vote to be able to be have the full complement of nine Supreme Court justices.
Also, the Second Amendment, which is totally under siege by people like Hillary Clinton.
We are killing -- absolutely killing our energy business in this country.
Coal will last for 1,000 years in this country.
You take a look at what's happening to steel and the cost of steel and China dumping vast amounts of steel all over the United States, which essentially is killing our steelworkers and our steel companies.
The EPA is so restrictive that they are putting our energy companies out of business.
But the price of coal is down worldwide.
But these were statements that should never, ever have been made.
Well, the D.C. vs. Heller decision was very strongly -- and she was extremely angry about it.
I mean, she was very, very angry when upheld.
And it was a well-crafted decision.
But Hillary was extremely upset, extremely angry.
Well, I was upset because, unfortunately, dozens of toddlers injure themselves, even kill people with guns, because, unfortunately, not everyone who has loaded guns in their homes takes appropriate precautions.
Well, if we put another two or perhaps three justice on, that's really what's going to be -- that will happen.
And that'll happen automatically, in my opinion, because I am putting pro-life justices on the court.
So many states are putting very stringent regulations on women that block them from exercising that choice to the extent that they are defunding Planned Parenthood, which, of course, provides all kinds of cancer screenings and other benefits for women in our country.
Secretary Clinton, you have offered no specific plan for how you want to secure our southern border.
Hillary wants to give amnesty.
It's just pouring and destroying their youth.
We need the wall.
And the Border Patrol, ICE, they all want the wall.
But we have some bad hombres here, and we're going to get them out.
It means you would have to have a massive law enforcement presence, where law enforcement officers would be going school to school, home to home, business to business, rounding up people who are undocumented.
And we would then have to put them on trains, on buses to get them out of our country.
When it comes to the wall that Donald talks about building, he went to Mexico, he had a meeting with the Mexican president.
Didn't even raise it.
He choked and then got into a Twitter war because the Mexican president said we're not paying for that wall.
It's a disaster.
I voted for border security, and there are...
There are some limited places where that was appropriate.
There also is necessarily going to be new technology and how best to deploy that.
Now, what I am also arguing is that bringing undocumented immigrants out from the shadows, putting them into the formal economy will be good, because then employers can't exploit them and undercut Americans' wages.
And Donald knows a lot about this.
Nobody knows about it, nobody talks about it.
They've been deported.
But what she doesn't say is that President Obama has deported millions and millions of people just the way it is.
We will not have open borders.
That was a great pivot off the fact that she wants open borders, OK?
People are going to come in from Syria.
So I just want to tell you, she wants open borders.
He said nice things about me.
He has no respect for our president.
And I'll tell you what: We're in very serious trouble, because we have a country with tremendous numbers of nuclear warheads -- 1,800, by the way -- where they expanded and we didn't, 1,800 nuclear warheads.
The Russians have said, according to many, many reports, I can't believe they allowed us to do this.
She has been outsmarted by Putin.
I -- I find it ironic that he's raising nuclear weapons.
He's...
He said, well, if we have them, why don't we use them, which I think is terrifying.
There's no quote.
... about a potential nuclear -- nuclear competition in Asia, you said, you know, go ahead, enjoy yourselves, folks.
And defend yourselves.
And defend yourselves.
And defend yourself.
I want us to have the biggest jobs program since World War II, jobs in infrastructure and advanced manufacturing.
I want to make college debt-free and for families making less than $125,000, you will not get a tuition bill from a public college or university if the plan that I worked on with Bernie Sanders is enacted.
That is a plan that has been analyzed by independent experts which said that it could produce 10 million new jobs.
Because his whole plan is to cut taxes, to give the biggest tax breaks ever to the wealthy and to corporations, adding $20 trillion to our debt, and causing the kind of dislocation that we have seen before, because it truly will be trickle-down economics on steroids.
We will have a massive, massive tax increase under Hillary Clinton's plan.
Saudi Arabia, nothing but money.
We protect Saudi Arabia.
They have to pay up.
We have to tell Japan in a very nice way, we have to tell Germany, all of these countries, South Korea, we have to say, you have to help us out.
Our jobs are being sucked out of our economy.
You look at all of the places that I just left, you go to Pennsylvania, you go to Ohio, you go to Florida, you go to any of them.
You go upstate New York.
Our jobs have fled to Mexico and other places.
I have costed out what I'm going to do.
When my husband was president, we went from a $300 billion deficit to a $200 billion surplus and we were actually on the path to eliminating the national debt.
When President Obama came into office, he inherited the worst economic disaster since the Great Depression.
I personally believe that the steps that President Obama took saved the economy.
We're beginning to see some increase in incomes, and we certainly have had a long string of increasing jobs.
They're growing at 8 percent.
China is growing at 7 percent.
We are growing -- our last report came out -- and it's right around the 1 percent level.
And I think it's going down.
A terrible jobs report.
Look, our country is stagnant.
Now she wants to sign Trans-Pacific Partnership.
She lied when she said she didn't call it the gold standard in one of the debates.
And they actually fact checked, and they said I was right.
Well, first, let me say, number one, when I saw the final agreement for TPP, I said I was against it.
It didn't meet my test.
There's only one of us on this stage who's actually shipped jobs to Mexico, because that's Donald.
And, you know, one of the biggest problems we have with China is the illegal dumping of steel and aluminum into our markets.
Donald has bought Chinese steel and aluminum.
He was borrowing $14 million from his father to start his businesses.
I built a massive company, a great company, some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, worth many, many billions of dollars.
And what happened is now ISIS is in 32 countries.
And since then, as we all know, nine women have come forward and have said that you either groped them or kissed them without their consent.
Those people -- I don't know those people.
Just like if you look at what came out today on the clips where I was wondering what happened with my rally in Chicago and other rallies where we had such violence?
She's the one and Obama that caused the violence.
Because what I saw what they did, which is a criminal act, by the way, where they're telling people to go out and start fist-fights and start violence.
And I'll tell you what, in particular in Chicago, people were hurt and people could have been killed in that riot.
One lie.
She's lied hundreds of times to the people, to Congress, and to the FBI.
He never apologizes or says he's sorry for anything.
He went after Mr. and Mrs. Khan, the parents of a young man who died serving our country, a Gold Star family, because of their religion.
He went after John McCain, a prisoner of war, said he prefers "people who aren't captured."
He went after a federal judge, born in Indiana, but who Donald said couldn't be trusted to try the fraud and racketeering case against Trump University because his parents were Mexican.
But just briefly, the Clinton Foundation made it possible for 11 million people around the world with HIV-AIDS to afford treatment, and that's about half all the people in the world who are getting treatment.
... and it's a criminal enterprise, and so many people know it.
It's a criminal enterprise.
So these are people that push gays off business -- off buildings.
These are people that kill women and treat women horribly.
And yet you take their money.
Well, very quickly, we at the Clinton Foundation spend 90 percent -- 90 percent of all the money that is donated on behalf of programs of people around the world and in our own country.
And I'd be happy to compare what we do with the Trump Foundation, which took money from other people and bought a six- foot portrait of Donald.
He is the first candidate ever to run for president in the last 40-plus years who has not released his tax returns, so everything he says about charity or anything else, we can't prove it.
You know, half of all immigrants -- undocumented immigrants in our country -- actually pay federal income tax.
So we have undocumented immigrants in America who are paying more federal income tax than a billionaire.
So let me just tell you very quickly, we're entitled because of the laws that people like her passed to take massive amounts of depreciation on other charges, and we do it.
Most of her donors have done the same thing as I do.
You have been warning at rallies recently that this election is rigged and that Hillary Clinton is in the process of trying to steal it from you.
It's crooked -- she's -- she's guilty of a very, very serious crime.
And just in that respect, I say it's rigged, because she should never...
He said the Republican primary was rigged against him.
I think what the FBI did and what the Department of Justice did, including meeting with her husband, the attorney general, in the back of an airplane on the tarmac in Arizona, I think it's disgraceful.
These people have all left.
All she had to do was stay there, and now we're going in to get it.
Well, you know, once again, Donald is implying that he didn't support the invasion of Iraq.
I'm just amazed that he seems to think that the Iraqi government and our allies and everybody else launched the attack on Mosul to help me in this election, but that's how Donald thinks.
Chris, we don't gain anything.
We don't gain anything.
And if you think that going into Mosul after we let the world know we're going in, and all of the people that we really wanted -- the leaders -- they're all gone.
And this is what's caused the great migration, where she's taking in tens of thousands of Syrian refugees, who probably in many cases -- not probably, who are definitely...
And wait until you see what happens in the coming years.
In fact, the killer of the dozens of people at the nightclub in Orlando, the Pulse nightclub, was born in Queens, the same place Donald was born.
And right now, they're in 32 countries.
And during the cease-fire, Russia took over vast swatches of land, and then they said we don't want the cease-fire anymore.
We are so outplayed on missiles, on cease-fires.
Well, I say they're wrong, because I'm going to create tremendous jobs.
We're not going to let our companies be raided by other countries where we lose all our jobs, we don't make our product anymore.
But if you look at the debt, which is the issue you asked about, Chris, I pay for everything I'm proposing.
And one thing we have to do: Repeal and replace the disaster known as Obamacare.
It's destroying our country.
It's destroying our businesses, our small business and our big businesses.
The Affordable Care Act extended the solvency of the Medicare Trust Fund.
Your husband disagrees with you.
We take care of illegal immigrants, people that come into the country illegally, better than we take care of our vets.
They have no education.
They have no jobs.

Sentences with 0 agreed annotators:
Good evening from Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York.
"I'm Lester Holt, anchor of ""NBC Nightly News."""
I want to welcome you to the first presidential debate.
The participants tonight are Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton.
This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization.
The commission drafted tonight's format, and the rules have been agreed to by the campaigns.
The 90-minute debate is divided into six segments, each 15 minutes long.
We'll explore three topic areas tonight: Achieving prosperity; America's direction; and securing America.
At the start of each segment, I will ask the same lead-off question to both candidates, and they will each have up to two minutes to respond.
From that point until the end of the segment, we'll have an open discussion.
The questions are mine and have not been shared with the commission or the campaigns.
The audience here in the room has agreed to remain silent so that we can focus on what the candidates are saying.
I will invite you to applaud, however, at this moment, as we welcome the candidates: Democratic nominee for president of the United States, Hillary Clinton, and Republican nominee for president of the United States, Donald J. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
How are you, Donald?
(APPLAUSE)
Good luck to you.
(APPLAUSE)
Well, I don't expect us to cover all the issues of this campaign tonight, but I remind everyone, there are two more presidential debates scheduled.
We are going to focus on many of the issues that voters tell us are most important, and we're going to press for specifics.
I am honored to have this role, but this evening belongs to the candidates and, just as important, to the American people.
Candidates, we look forward to hearing you articulate your policies and your positions, as well as your visions and your values.
So, let's begin.
"We're calling this opening segment ""Achieving Prosperity."""
And central to that is jobs.
There are two economic realities in America today.
There's been a record six straight years of job growth, and new census numbers show incomes have increased at a record rate after years of stagnation.
However, income inequality remains significant, and nearly half of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck.
Beginning with you, Secretary Clinton, why are you a better choice than your opponent to create the kinds of jobs that will put more money into the pockets of American works?
Well, thank you, Lester, and thanks to Hofstra for hosting us.
The central question in this election is really what kind of country we want to be and what kind of future we'll build together.
Today is my granddaughter's second birthday, so I think about this a lot.
First, we have to build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.
That means we need new jobs, good jobs, with rising incomes.
I want us to invest in you.
I want us to invest in your future.
That means jobs in infrastructure, in advanced manufacturing, innovation and technology, clean, renewable energy, and small business, because most of the new jobs will come from small business.
We also have to make the economy fairer.
That starts with raising the national minimum wage and also guarantee, finally, equal pay for women's work.
I also want to see more companies do profit-sharing.
If you help create the profits, you should be able to share in them, not just the executives at the top.
And I want us to do more to support people who are struggling to balance family and work.
I've heard from so many of you about the difficult choices you face and the stresses that you're under.
So let's have paid family leave, earned sick days.
Let's be sure we have affordable child care and debt-free college.
How are we going to do it?
Finally, we tonight are on the stage together, Donald Trump and I. Donald, it's good to be with you.
We're going to have a debate where we are talking about the important issues facing our country.
You have to judge us, who can shoulder the immense, awesome responsibilities of the presidency, who can put into action the plans that will make your life better.
I hope that I will be able to earn your vote on November 8th.
Secretary Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump, the same question to you.
It's about putting money -- more money into the pockets of American workers.
You have up to two minutes.
Thank you, Lester.
And we have a very good fight.
And we have a winning fight.
Because they're using our country as a piggy bank to rebuild China, and many other countries are doing the same thing.
So we're losing our good jobs, so many of them.
When you look at what's happening in Mexico, a friend of mine who builds plants said it's the eighth wonder of the world.
They're building some of the biggest plants anywhere in the world, some of the most sophisticated, some of the best plants.
With the United States, as he said, not so much.
They're all leaving.
And we can't allow it to happen anymore.
As far as child care is concerned and so many other things, I think Hillary and I agree on that.
We probably disagree a little bit as to numbers and amounts and what we're going to do, but perhaps we'll be talking about that later.
But we have to stop our jobs from being stolen from us.
We have to stop our companies from leaving the United States and, with it, firing all of their people.
All you have to do is take a look at Carrier air conditioning in Indianapolis.
They left -- fired 1,400 people.
They're going to Mexico.
We cannot let it happen.
That's going to be a job creator like we haven't seen since Ronald Reagan.
It's going to be a beautiful thing to watch.
Companies will come.
They will build.
They will expand.
New companies will start.
And I look very, very much forward to doing it.
We have to renegotiate our trade deals, and we have to stop these countries from stealing our companies and our jobs.
Secretary Clinton, would you like to respond?
Well, I think that trade is an important issue.
Of course, we are 5 percent of the world's population; we have to trade with the other 95 percent.
And we need to have smart, fair trade deals.
We also, though, need to have a tax system that rewards work and not just financial transactions.
And the kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle-down economics all over again.
I call it trumped-up trickle-down, because that's exactly what it would be.
That is not how we grow the economy.
We just have a different view about what's best for growing the economy, how we make investments that will actually produce jobs and rising incomes.
I think we come at it from somewhat different perspectives.
I understand that.
I don't buy that.
I have a different experience.
My father was a small-businessman.
He worked really hard.
He printed drapery fabrics on long tables, where he pulled out those fabrics and he went down with a silkscreen and dumped the paint in and took the squeegee and kept going.
And so what I believe is the more we can do for the middle class, the more we can invest in you, your education, your skills, your future, the better we will be off and the better we'll grow.
That's the kind of economy I want us to see again.
Let me follow up with Mr. Trump, if you can.
You've talked about creating 25 million jobs, and you've promised to bring back millions of jobs for Americans.
How are you going to bring back the industries that have left this country for cheaper labor overseas?
How, specifically, are you going to tell American manufacturers that you have to come back?
Our country's in deep trouble.
We don't know what we're doing when it comes to devaluations and all of these countries all over the world, especially China.
They're the best, the best ever at it
What they're doing to us is a very, very sad thing.
So we have to do that.
We have to renegotiate our trade deals.
And, Lester, they're taking our jobs, they're giving incentives, they're doing things that, frankly, we don't do.
Let me give you the example of Mexico.
They have a VAT tax.
We're on a different system.
When we sell into Mexico, there's a tax.
When they sell in -- automatic, 16 percent, approximately.
When they sell into us, there's no tax.
It's a defective agreement.
It's been defective for a long time, many years, but the politicians haven't done anything about it.
Now, in all fairness to Secretary Clinton -- yes, is that OK?
Good.
I want you to be very happy.
It's very important to me.
But in all fairness to Secretary Clinton, when she started talking about this, it was really very recently.
She's been doing this for 30 years.
And why hasn't she made the agreements better?
The NAFTA agreement is defective.
Just because of the tax and many other reasons, but just because of the fact...
Let me interrupt just a moment, but...
Secretary Clinton and others, politicians, should have been doing this for years, not right now, because of the fact that we've created a movement.
They should have been doing this for years.
What's happened to our jobs and our country and our economy generally is -- look, we owe $20 trillion.
We cannot do it any longer, Lester.
Back to the question, though.
How do you bring back -- specifically bring back jobs, American manufacturers?
How do you make them bring the jobs back?
Well, the first thing you do is don't let the jobs leave.
The companies are leaving.
I could name, I mean, there are thousands of them.
And what you do is you say, fine, you want to go to Mexico or some other country, good luck.
We wish you a lot of luck
But if you think you're going to make your air conditioners or your cars or your cookies or whatever you make and bring them into our country without a tax, you're wrong.
And once you say you're going to have to tax them coming in, and our politicians never do this, because they have special interests and the special interests want those companies to leave, because in many cases, they own the companies.
So what I'm saying is, we can stop them from leaving.
We have to stop them from leaving.
And that's a big, big factor.
Let me let Secretary Clinton get in here.
That was in large part because of tax policies that slashed taxes on the wealthy, failed to invest in the middle class, took their eyes off of Wall Street, and created a perfect storm.
Well, it did collapse.
That's called business, by the way.
Nine million people -- nine million people lost their jobs.
Five million people lost their homes.
And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.
Now, we have come back from that abyss.
And it has not been easy.
So we're now on the precipice of having a potentially much better economy, but the last thing we need to do is to go back to the policies that failed us in the first place.
Take clean energy.
Some country is going to be the clean- energy superpower of the 21st century.
I think it's real.
I think science is real.
I do not say that.
And I think it's important that we grip this and deal with it, both at home and abroad.
And here's what we can do.
We can deploy a half a billion more solar panels.
We can have enough clean energy to power every home.
We can build a new modern electric grid.
That's a lot of jobs; that's a lot of new economic activity.
So I've tried to be very specific about what we can and should do, and I am determined that we're going to get the economy really moving again, building on the progress we've made over the last eight years, but never going back to what got us in trouble in the first place.
Mr. Trump?
She talks about solar panels.
We invested in a solar company, our country.
That was a disaster.
They lost plenty of money on that one.
Now, look, I'm a great believer in all forms of energy, but we're putting a lot of people out of work.
You can't do what you're looking to do with $20 trillion in debt.
The Obama administration, from the time they've come in, is over 230 years' worth of debt, and he's topped it.
So I will tell you this.
We have to do a much better job at keeping our jobs.
And we have to do a much better job at giving companies incentives to build new companies or to expand, because they're not doing it.
And all you have to do is look at Michigan and look at Ohio and look at all of these places where so many of their jobs and their companies are just leaving, they're gone.
And, Hillary, I'd just ask you this.
You've been doing this for 30 years.
Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now?
For 30 years, you've been doing it, and now you're just starting to think of solutions.
Well, actually...
I will bring -- excuse me.
I will bring back jobs.
You can't bring back jobs.
Well, actually, I have thought about this quite a bit.
Yeah, for 30 years.
And I have -- well, not quite that long.
I think a lot about what worked and how we can make it work again...
Well, he approved NAFTA...
(CROSSTALK)
... million new jobs, a balanced budget...
He approved NAFTA, which is the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.
But let's not assume that trade is the only challenge we have in the economy.
I think it is a part of it, and I've said what I'm going to do.
I'm going to have a special prosecutor.
We're going to enforce the trade deals we have, and we're going to hold people accountable.
We increased them to China 50 percent.
So I know how to really work to get new jobs and to get exports that helped to create more new jobs.
Very quickly...
But you haven't done it in 30 years or 26 years or any number you want to...
Well, I've been a senator, Donald...
You haven't done it.
You haven't done it.
And I have been a secretary of state...
Excuse me.
And I have done a lot...
Your husband signed NAFTA, which was one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.
Well, that's your opinion.
That is your opinion.
But you know that if you did win, you would approve that, and that will be almost as bad as NAFTA.
Nothing will ever top NAFTA.
I wrote about that in...
(CROSSTALK)
You said it's the finest deal you've ever seen.
No.
Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts.
Not.
I wrote about that in my book...
So is it President Obama's fault?
... before you even announced.
Is it President Obama's fault?
Look, there are differences...
Secretary, is it President Obama's fault?
There are...
Because he's pushing it.
There are different views about what's good for our country, our economy, and our leadership in the world.
And I think it's important to look at what we need to do to get the economy going again.
But you have no plan.
But in -- oh, but I do.
Secretary, you have no plan.
In fact, I have written a book about it.
"It's called ""Stronger Together."""
You can pick it up tomorrow at a bookstore...
That's about all you've...
(CROSSTALK)
Folks, we're going to...
... or at an airport near you.
We're going to move to...
But it's because I see this -- we need to have strong growth, fair growth, sustained growth.
We also have to look at how we help families balance the responsibilities at home and the responsibilities at business.
So we have a very robust set of plans.
Your regulations are a disaster, and you're going to increase regulations all over the place.
I'm very proud of it.
But regulations, you are going to regulate these businesses out of existence.
When I go around -- Lester, I tell you this, I've been all over.
And when I go around, despite the tax cut, the thing -- the things that business as in people like the most is the fact that I'm cutting regulation.
You have regulations on top of regulations, and new companies cannot form and old companies are going out of business.
And you want to increase the regulations and make them even worse.
I'm going to cut regulations.
I'm going to cut taxes big league, and you're going to raise taxes big league, end of story.
Let me get you to pause right there, because we're going to move into -- we're going to move into the next segment.
We're going to talk taxes...
That can't -- that can't be left to stand.
Please just take 30 seconds and then we're going to go on.
I kind of assumed that there would be a lot of these charges and claims, and so...
Facts.
Because what I have proposed...
And take a look at mine, also, and you'll see.
What I have proposed would cut regulations and streamline them for small businesses.
What I have proposed would be paid for by raising taxes on the wealthy, because they have made all the gains in the economy.
And I think it's time that the wealthy and corporations paid their fair share to support this country.
Well, you just opened the next segment.
Well, could I just finish -- I think I...
(CROSSTALK)
I'm going to give you a chance right here...
I think I should -- you go to her website, and you take a look at her website.
... with a new 15-minute segment...
She's going to raise taxes $1.3 trillion.
Mr. Trump, I'm going to...
And look at her website.
You know what?
It's no difference than this.
She's telling us how to fight ISIS.
Just go to her website.
She tells you how to fight ISIS on her website.
I don't think General Douglas MacArthur would like that too much.
The next segment, we're continuing...
Well, at least I have a plan to fight ISIS.
... achieving prosperity...
No, no, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
No, we're not.
No, we're not.
See, you're telling the enemy everything you want to do.
That's a -- that's -- go to the -- please, fact checkers, get to work.
OK, you are unpacking a lot here.
And we're still on the issue of achieving prosperity.
And I want to talk about taxes.
The fundamental difference between the two of you concerns the wealthy.
Secretary Clinton, you're calling for a tax increase on the wealthiest Americans.
I'd like you to further defend that.
And, Mr. Trump, you're calling for tax cuts for the wealthy.
I'd like you to defend that.
And this next two-minute answer goes to you, Mr. Trump.
Well, I'm really calling for major jobs, because the wealthy are going create tremendous jobs.
They're going to expand their companies.
They're going to do a tremendous job.
I'm getting rid of the carried interest provision.
And if you really look, it's not a tax -- it's really not a great thing for the wealthy.
It's a great thing for the middle class.
It's a great thing for companies to expand.
And when these people are going to put billions and billions of dollars into companies, and when they're going to bring $2.5 trillion back from overseas, where they can't bring the money back, because politicians like Secretary Clinton won't allow them to bring the money back, because the taxes are so onerous, and the bureaucratic red tape, so what -- is so bad.
And instead of bringing it back and putting the money to work, because they can't work out a deal to -- and everybody agrees it should be brought back.
Instead of that, they're leaving our country to get their money, because they can't bring their money back into our country, because of bureaucratic red tape, because they can't get together.
Because we have -- we have a president that can't sit them around a table and get them to approve something.
And here's the thing.
And with a little leadership, you'd get it in here very quickly, and it could be put to use on the inner cities and lots of other things, and it would be beautiful.
But we have no leadership.
And honestly, that starts with Secretary Clinton.
All right.
You have two minutes of the same question to defend tax increases on the wealthiest Americans, Secretary Clinton.
I have a feeling that by, the end of this evening, I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened.
Why not?
Why not?
Yeah, why not?
(LAUGHTER)
You know, just join the debate by saying more crazy things.
Now, let me say this, it is absolutely the case...
There's nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back into their country.
This is -- this is Secretary Clinton's two minutes, please.
Yes.
Yeah, well, let's start the clock again, Lester.
We've looked at your tax proposals.
I don't see changes in the corporate tax rates or the kinds of proposals you're referring to that would cause the repatriation, bringing back of money that's stranded overseas.
I happen to support that.
Then you didn't read it.
I happen to -- I happen to support that in a way that will actually work to our benefit.
But when I look at what you have proposed, you have what is called now the Trump loophole, because it would so advantage you and the business you do.
You've proposed an approach that has a...
Who gave it that name?
The first I've -- who gave it that name?
(CROSSTALK)
Mr. Trump, this is Secretary Clinton's two minutes.
... $4 billion tax benefit for your family.
And when you look at what you are proposing...
How much?
How much for my family?
... it is...
Lester, how much?
... as I said, trumped-up trickle-down.
Trickle-down did not work.
It got us into the mess we were in, in 2008 and 2009.
Slashing taxes on the wealthy hasn't worked.
And a lot of really smart, wealthy people know that.
And they are saying, hey, we need to do more to make the contributions we should be making to rebuild the middle class.
I don't think top-down works in America.
Broad-based, inclusive growth is what we need in America, not more advantages for people at the very top.
Mr. Trump, we're...
Typical politician.
All talk, no action.
Sounds good, doesn't work.
Never going to happen.
Secretary Clinton
And believe me: We're in a bubble right now.
And the only thing that looks good is the stock market, but if you raise interest rates even a little bit, that's going to come crashing down.
We are in a big, fat, ugly bubble.
And we better be awfully careful.
This Janet Yellen of the Fed.
And believe me: The day Obama goes off, and he leaves, and goes out to the golf course for the rest of his life to play golf, when they raise interest rates, you're going to see some very bad things happen, because the Fed is not doing their job.
The Fed is being more political than Secretary Clinton.
Mr. Trump, we're talking about the burden that Americans have to pay, yet you have not released your tax returns.
And the reason nominees have released their returns for decades is so that voters will know if their potential president owes money to -- who he owes it to and any business conflicts.
Don't Americans have a right to know if there are any conflicts of interest?
It shows income -- in fact, the income -- I just looked today -- the income is filed at $694 million for this past year, $694 million.
If you would have told me I was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago, I would have been very surprised.
But that's the kind of thinking that our country needs.
You know what that is?
That means, who's negotiating these trade deals?
We have people that are political hacks negotiating our trade deals.
The IRS says an audit...
Excuse me.
... of your taxes -- you're perfectly free to release your taxes during an audit.
And so the question, does the public's right to know outweigh your personal...
Well, I told you, I will release them as soon as the audit.
I know a lot of wealthy people that have never been audited.
I said, do you get audited?
I get audited almost every year.
And in a way, I should be complaining.
I'm not even complaining.
I don't mind it.
It's almost become a way of life.
I get audited by the IRS.
But other people don't.
I will say this.
We have a situation in this country that has to be taken care of.
I will release my tax returns -- against my lawyer's wishes -- when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted.
As soon as she releases them, I will release.
(APPLAUSE)
I will release my tax returns.
"And that's against -- my lawyers, they say, ""Don't do it."""
I will tell you this.
No -- in fact, watching shows, they're reading the papers.
Almost every lawyer says, you don't release your returns until the audit's complete.
When the audit's complete, I'll do it.
But I would go against them if she releases her e-mails.
So it's negotiable?
It's not negotiable, no.
Let her release the e-mails.
Why did she delete 33,000...
Well, I'll let her answer that.
But let me just admonish the audience one more time.
There was an agreement.
We did ask you to be silent, so it would be helpful for us.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I think you've seen another example of bait-and- switch here.
You can go and see nearly, I think, 39, 40 years of our tax returns, but everyone has done it.
We know the IRS has made clear there is no prohibition on releasing it when you're under audit.
So you've got to ask yourself, why won't he release his tax returns?
And I think there may be a couple of reasons.
First, maybe he's not as rich as he says he is.
Second, maybe he's not as charitable as he claims to be.
Third, we don't know all of his business dealings, but we have been told through investigative reporting that he owes about $650 million to Wall Street and foreign banks.
So if he's paid zero, that means zero for troops, zero for vets, zero for schools or health.
And I think probably he's not all that enthusiastic about having the rest of our country see what the real reasons are, because it must be something really important, even terrible, that he's trying to hide.
And the financial disclosure statements, they don't give you the tax rate.
They don't give you all the details that tax returns would.
And it just seems to me that this is something that the American people deserve to see.
And I have no reason to believe that he's ever going to release his tax returns, because there's something he's hiding.
And we'll guess.
We'll keep guessing at what it might be that he's hiding.
But I think the question is, were he ever to get near the White House, what would be those conflicts?
Who does he owe money to?
Well, he owes you the answers to that, and he should provide them.
He also -- he also raised the issue of your e-mails.
Do you want to respond to that?
I do.
You know, I made a mistake using a private e- mail.
That's for sure.
And if I had to do it over again, I would, obviously, do it differently.
But I'm not going to make any excuses.
It was a mistake, and I take responsibility for that.
Mr. Trump?
That was more than a mistake.
That was done purposely.
OK?
That was not a mistake.
That was done purposely.
When you have your staff taking the Fifth Amendment, taking the Fifth so they're not prosecuted, when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the Fifth, I think it's disgraceful.
And believe me, this country thinks it's -- really thinks it's disgraceful, also.
That I can tell you.
You learn a lot from financial disclosure.
And you should go down and take a look at that.
The other thing, I'm extremely underleveraged.
The report that said $650 -- which, by the way, a lot of friends of mine that know my business say, boy, that's really not a lot of money.
It's not a lot of money relative to what I had.
And the $650 isn't even on that.
But it's not $650.
It's much less than that.
But I could give you a list of banks, I would -- if that would help you, I would give you a list of banks.
These are very fine institutions, very fine banks.
I could do that very quickly.
I am very underleveraged.
I have a great company.
I have a tremendous income.
And the reason I say that is not in a braggadocios way.
It's because it's about time that this country had somebody running it that has an idea about money.
When we have $20 trillion in debt, and our country's a mess, you know, it's one thing to have $20 trillion in debt and our roads are good and our bridges are good and everything's in great shape, our airports.
Our airports are like from a third world country.
You land at LaGuardia, you land at Kennedy, you land at LAX, you land at Newark, and you come in from Dubai and Qatar and you see these incredible -- you come in from China, you see these incredible airports, and you land -- we've become a third world country.
So the worst of all things has happened.
We owe $20 trillion, and we're a mess.
We haven't even started.
And it's really a shame.
And it's politicians like Secretary Clinton that have caused this problem.
Our country has tremendous problems.
We're a debtor nation.
We're a serious debtor nation.
And we have a country that needs new roads, new tunnels, new bridges, new airports, new schools, new hospitals.
And we don't have the money, because it's been squandered on so many of your ideas.
We'll let you respond and we'll move on to the next segment.
(APPLAUSE)
And the other thing I think is important...
It would be squandered, too, believe me.
... is if your -- if your main claim to be president of the United States is your business, then I think we should talk about that.
You know, your campaign manager said that you built a lot of businesses on the backs of little guys.
And, indeed, I have met a lot of the people who were stiffed by you and your businesses, Donald.
I've met dishwashers, painters, architects, glass installers, marble installers, drapery installers, like my dad was, who you refused to pay when they finished the work that you asked them to do.
We have an architect in the audience who designed one of your clubhouses at one of your golf courses.
It's a beautiful facility.
It immediately was put to use.
And you wouldn't pay what the man needed to be paid, what he was charging you to do...
Maybe he didn't do a good job and I was unsatisfied with his work...
Well, to...
Which our country should do, too.
Do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the course of your business not deserve some kind of apology from someone who has taken their labor, taken the goods that they produced, and then refused to pay them?
I can only say that I'm certainly relieved that my late father never did business with you.
He provided a good middle-class life for us, but the people he worked for, he expected the bargain to be kept on both sides.
There are a lot of great businesspeople that have never taken bankruptcy once.
You call yourself the King of Debt.
You talk about leverage.
Wrong.
Well, sometimes there's not a direct transfer of skills from business to government, but sometimes what happened in business would be really bad for government.
Let's let Mr. Trump...
And we need to be very clear about that.
So, yeah, I think -- I do think it's time.
Look, it's all words, it's all sound bites.
I built an unbelievable company.
Some of the greatest assets anywhere in the world, real estate assets anywhere in the world, beyond the United States, in Europe, lots of different places.
It's an unbelievable company.
And when Secretary Clinton talks about people that didn't get paid, first of all, they did get paid a lot, but taken advantage of the laws of the nation.
Now, if you want to change the laws, you've been there a long time, change the laws.
But I take advantage of the laws of the nation because I'm running a company.
My obligation right now is to do well for myself, my family, my employees, for my companies.
And that's what I do.
But what she doesn't say is that tens of thousands of people that are unbelievably happy and that love me.
I'll give you an example.
We're just opening up on Pennsylvania Avenue right next to the White House, so if I don't get there one way, I'm going to get to Pennsylvania Avenue another.
But we're opening the Old Post Office.
I'm a year ahead of schedule.
And that's what this country should be doing.
We build roads and they cost two and three and four times what they're supposed to cost.
We buy products for our military and they come in at costs that are so far above what they were supposed to be, because we don't have people that know what they're doing.
When we look at the budget, the budget is bad to a large extent because we have people that have no idea as to what to do and how to buy.
The Trump International is way under budget and way ahead of schedule.
And we should be able to do that for our country.
Well, we're well behind schedule, so I want to move to our next segment.
We move into our next segment talking about America's direction.
And let's start by talking about race.
The share of Americans who say race relations are bad in this country is the highest it's been in decades, much of it amplified by shootings of African-Americans by police, as we've seen recently in Charlotte and Tulsa.
Race has been a big issue in this campaign, and one of you is going to have to bridge a very wide and bitter gap.
So how do you heal the divide?
Secretary Clinton, you get two minutes on this.
Well, you're right.
Race remains a significant challenge in our country.
We've just seen those two tragic examples in both Tulsa and Charlotte.
And we've got to do several things at the same time.
We have to restore trust between communities and the police.
We have to work to make sure that our police are using the best training, the best techniques, that they're well prepared to use force only when necessary.
Everyone should be respected by the law, and everyone should respect the law.
Right now, that's not the case in a lot of our neighborhoods.
So I have, ever since the first day of my campaign, called for criminal justice reform.
I've laid out a platform that I think would begin to remedy some of the problems we have in the criminal justice system.
But we also have to recognize, in addition to the challenges that we face with policing, there are so many good, brave police officers who equally want reform.
So we have to bring communities together in order to begin working on that as a mutual goal.
And we've got to get guns out of the hands of people who should not have them.
So we have to do two things, as I said.
We have to restore trust.
We have to work with the police.
We have to make sure they respect the communities and the communities respect them.
And we have to tackle the plague of gun violence, which is a big contributor to a lot of the problems that we're seeing today.
All right, Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.
How do you heal the divide?
Well, first of all, Secretary Clinton doesn't want to use a couple of words, and that's law and order.
And we need law and order.
If we don't have it, we're not going to have a country.
And when I look at what's going on in Charlotte, a city I love, a city where I have investments, when I look at what's going on throughout various parts of our country, whether it's -- I mean, I can just keep naming them all day long -- we need law and order in our country.
We have endorsements from, I think, almost every police group, very -- I mean, a large percentage of them in the United States.
We have to bring back law and order.
But you take the gun away from criminals that shouldn't be having it.
We have gangs roaming the street.
And in many cases, they're illegally here, illegal immigrants.
And they have guns.
And they shoot people.
And we have to be very strong.
And we have to be very vigilant.
We have to be -- we have to know what we're doing.
Right now, our police, in many cases, are afraid to do anything.
We have to protect our inner cities, because African-American communities are being decimated by crime, decimated.
Your two -- your two minutes expired, but I do want to follow up.
Stop-and-frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York, because it largely singled out black and Hispanic young men.
The argument is that it's a form of racial profiling.
These are people that are bad people that shouldn't be -- when you have 3,000 shootings in Chicago from January 1st, when you have 4,000 people killed in Chicago by guns, from the beginning of the presidency of Barack Obama, his hometown, you have to have stop-and-frisk.
You need more police.
You need a better community, you know, relation.
You don't have good community relations in Chicago.
It's terrible.
I have property there.
It's terrible what's going on in Chicago.
But when you look -- and Chicago's not the only -- you go to Ferguson, you go to so many different places.
You need better relationships.
I agree with Secretary Clinton on this.
You need better relationships between the communities and the police, because in some cases, it's not good.
But you look at Dallas, where the relationships were really studied, the relationships were really a beautiful thing, and then five police officers were killed one night very violently.
So there's some bad things going on.
Some really bad things.
Secretary Clinton...
But we need -- Lester, we need law and order.
And we need law and order in the inner cities, because the people that are most affected by what's happening are African-American and Hispanic people.
And it's very unfair to them what our politicians are allowing to happen.
Secretary Clinton?
Ugh.
You know, the vibrancy of the black church, the black businesses that employ so many people, the opportunities that so many families are working to provide for their kids.
There's a lot that we should be proud of and we should be supporting and lifting up.
But we do always have to make sure we keep people safe.
There are the right ways of doing it, and then there are ways that are ineffective.
Stop-and-frisk was found to be unconstitutional and, in part, because it was ineffective.
It did not do what it needed to do.
Now, I believe in community policing.
We just don't want to see it creep back up.
We've had 25 years of very good cooperation.
But there were some problems, some unintended consequences.
Too many young African-American and Latino men ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses.
So we've got to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system.
We cannot just say law and order.
We have to say -- we have to come forward with a plan that is going to divert people from the criminal justice system, deal with mandatory minimum sentences, which have put too many people away for too long for doing too little.
We need to have more second chance programs.
You shouldn't have a profit motivation to fill prison cells with young Americans.
So there are some positive ways we can work on this.
And I believe strongly that commonsense gun safety measures would assist us.
Right now -- and this is something Donald has supported, along with the gun lobby -- right now, we've got too many military- style weapons on the streets.
In a lot of places, our police are outgunned.
We need comprehensive background checks, and we need to keep guns out of the hands of those who will do harm.
And we finally need to pass a prohibition on anyone who's on the terrorist watch list from being able to buy a gun in our country.
If you're too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun.
So there are things we can do, and we ought to do it in a bipartisan way.
Secretary Clinton, last week, you said we've got to do everything possible to improve policing, to go right at implicit bias.
Do you believe that police are implicitly biased against black people?
Lester, I think implicit bias is a problem for everyone, not just police.
I think, unfortunately, too many of us in our great country jump to conclusions about each other.
And therefore, I think we need all of us to be asking hard questions about, you know, why am I feeling this way?
But when it comes to policing, since it can have literally fatal consequences, I have said, in my first budget, we would put money into that budget to help us deal with implicit bias by retraining a lot of our police officers.
I've met with a group of very distinguished, experienced police chiefs a few weeks ago.
They admit it's an issue.
They've got a lot of concerns.
Mental health is one of the biggest concerns, because now police are having to handle a lot of really difficult mental health problems on the street.
They want support, they want more training, they want more assistance.
And I think the federal government could be in a position where we would offer and provide that.
Mr. Trump...
I'd like to respond to that.
Please.
First of all, I agree, and a lot of people even within my own party want to give certain rights to people on watch lists and no- fly lists.
I agree with you.
When a person is on a watch list or a no-fly list, and I have the endorsement of the NRA, which I'm very proud of.
These are very, very good people, and they're protecting the Second Amendment.
But I think we have to look very strongly at no-fly lists and watch lists.
And when people are on there, even if they shouldn't be on there, we'll help them, we'll help them legally, we'll help them get off.
But I tend to agree with that quite strongly
And that's a term that I think was a -- it's -- it's been horribly met, as you know.
I think you've apologized for it.
But I think it was a terrible thing to say.
And when it comes to stop-and-frisk, you know, you're talking about takes guns away.
Well, I'm talking about taking guns away from gangs and people that use them.
And I don't think -- I really don't think you disagree with me on this, if you want to know the truth.
I think maybe there's a political reason why you can't say it, but I really don't believe -- in New York City, stop-and-frisk, we had 2,200 murders, and stop-and-frisk brought it down to 500 murders.
Five hundred murders is a lot of murders.
It's hard to believe, 500 is like supposed to be good?
But we went from 2,200 to 500.
And it was continued on by Mayor Bloomberg.
So there is...
You're wrong.
No, I'm not.
All right.
You check it.
And I give credit -- I give credit across the board going back two mayors, two police chiefs, because it has worked.
And other communities need to come together to do what will work, as well.
Look, one murder is too many.
But it is important that we learn about what has been effective.
And not go to things that sound good that really did not have the kind of impact that we would want.
Who disagrees with keeping neighborhoods safe?
But let's also add, no one should disagree about respecting the rights of young men who live in those neighborhoods.
And so we need to do a better job of working, again, with the communities, faith communities, business communities, as well as the police to try to deal with this problem.
This conversation is about race.
And so, Mr. Trump, I have to ask you for five...
I'd like to just respond, if I might.
Please -- 20 seconds.
I'd just like to respond.
Please respond, then I've got a quick follow-up for you.
I will.
Look, the African-American community has been let down by our politicians.
They talk good around election time, like right now, and after the election, they said, see ya later, I'll see you in four years.
The African-American community -- because -- look, the community within the inner cities has been so badly treated.
They've been abused and used in order to get votes by Democrat politicians, because that's what it is.
They've controlled these communities for up to 100 years.
Mr. Trump, let me...
(CROSSTALK)
Well, I -- I do think...
And I will tell you, you look at the inner cities -- and I just left Detroit, and I just left Philadelphia, and I just -- you know, you've seen me, I've been all over the place.
You decided to stay home, and that's OK.
But I will tell you, I've been all over.
And I've met some of the greatest people I'll ever meet within these communities.
And they are very, very upset with what their politicians have told them and what their politicians have done.
Mr. Trump, I
I think -- I think -- I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate.
And, yes, I did.
And you know what else I prepared for?
I prepared to be president.
And I think that's a good thing.
(APPLAUSE)
Mr. Trump, for five years, you perpetuated a false claim that the nation's first black president was not a natural-born citizen.
You questioned his legitimacy.
In the last couple of weeks, you acknowledged what most Americans have accepted for years: The president was born in the United States.
Can you tell us what took you so long?
I'll tell you very -- well, just very simple to say.
She failed to get the birth certificate.
When I got involved, I didn't fail.
I got him to give the birth certificate.
So I'm satisfied with it.
And I'll tell you why I'm satisfied with it.
That was...
(CROSSTALK)
Because I want to get on to defeating ISIS, because I want to get on to creating jobs, because I want to get on to having a strong border, because I want to get on to things that are very important to me and that are very important to the country.
I will let you respond.
It's important.
But I just want to get the answer here.
The birth certificate was produced in 2011.
You've continued to tell the story and question the president's legitimacy in 2012, '13, '14, '15...
Yeah.
.... as recently as January.
So the question is, what changed your mind?
I figured you'd ask the question tonight, of course.
But nobody was caring much about it.
But I was the one that got him to produce the birth certificate.
And I think I did a good job.
Secretary Clinton also fought it.
I mean, you know -- now, everybody in mainstream is going to say, oh, that's not true.
Look, it's true.
Sidney Blumenthal sent a reporter -- you just have to take a look at CNN, the last week, the interview with your former campaign manager.
And she was involved.
But just like she can't bring back jobs, she can't produce.
I'm sorry.
I'm just going to follow up -- and I will let you respond to that, because there's a lot there.
But we're talking about racial healing in this segment.
What do you say to Americans, people of color who...
(CROSSTALK)
Well, it was very -- I say nothing.
I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it.
He should have produced it a long time before.
I say nothing.
But let me just tell you.
When you talk about healing, I think that I've developed very, very good relationships over the last little while with the African-American community.
I think you can see that.
And I feel that they really wanted me to come to that conclusion.
And I think I did a great job and a great service not only for the country, but even for the president, in getting him to produce his birth certificate.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, just listen to what you heard.
(LAUGHTER)
And clearly, as Donald just admitted, he knew he was going to stand on this debate stage, and Lester Holt was going to be asking us questions, so he tried to put the whole racist birther lie to bed.
But it can't be dismissed that easily.
He has really started his political activity based on this racist lie that our first black president was not an American citizen.
There was absolutely no evidence for it, but he persisted, he persisted year after year, because some of his supporters, people that he was trying to bring into his fold, apparently believed it or wanted to believe it.
He actually was sued twice by the Justice Department.
So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior.
And the birther lie was a very hurtful one.
You know, Barack Obama is a man of great dignity.
And I could tell how much it bothered him and annoyed him that this was being touted and used against him.
But I like to remember what Michelle Obama said in her amazing speech at our Democratic National Convention: When they go low, we go high.
And Barack Obama went high, despite Donald Trump's best efforts to bring him down.
Mr. Trump, you can respond and we're going to move on to the next segment.
I would love to respond.
First of all, I got to watch in preparing for this some of your debates against Barack Obama.
You treated him with terrible disrespect.
And I watched the way you talk now about how lovely everything is and how wonderful you are.
It doesn't work that way.
I don't think you can deny that.
But just last week, your campaign manager said it was true.
So when you tried to act holier than thou, it really doesn't work.
It really doesn't.
It was very easy to do.
I notice you bring that up a lot.
And, you know, I also notice the very nasty commercials that you do on me in so many different ways, which I don't do on you.
Maybe I'm trying to save the money.
But, frankly, I look -- I look at that, and I say, isn't that amazing?
I'll go one step further.
And it's a tremendously successful club.
And I'm so glad I did it.
And I have been given great credit for what I did.
And I'm very, very proud of it.
And that's the way I feel.
That is the true way I feel.
"Our next segment is called ""Securing America."""
We want to start with a 21st century war happening every day in this country.
Our institutions are under cyber attack, and our secrets are being stolen.
So my question is, who's behind it?
And how do we fight it?
Secretary Clinton, this answer goes to you.
Well, I think cyber security, cyber warfare will be one of the biggest challenges facing the next president, because clearly we're facing at this point two different kinds of adversaries.
There are the independent hacking groups that do it mostly for commercial reasons to try to steal information that they can use to make money.
But increasingly, we are seeing cyber attacks coming from states, organs of states.
The most recent and troubling of these has been Russia.
There's no doubt now that Russia has used cyber attacks against all kinds of organizations in our country, and I am deeply concerned about this.
(CROSSTALK)
And we recently have learned that, you know, that this is one of their preferred methods of trying to wreak havoc and collect information.
We need to make it very clear -- whether it's Russia, China, Iran or anybody else -- the United States has much greater capacity.
And we are not going to sit idly by and permit state actors to go after our information, our private-sector information or our public-sector information.
And we're going to have to make it clear that we don't want to use the kinds of tools that we have.
We don't want to engage in a different kind of warfare.
But we will defend the citizens of this country.
And the Russians need to understand that.
I think they've been treating it as almost a probing, how far would we go, how much would we do.
That is just unacceptable.
It's one of the reasons why 50 national security officials who served in Republican information -- in administrations...
Your two minutes have expired.
... have said that Donald is unfit to be the commander- in-chief.
It's comments like that that really worry people who understand the threats that we face.
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes and the same question.
Who's behind it?
And how do we fight it?
That just happened, and many more are coming.
And I'm very proud of it.
They've never endorsed anybody before on immigration.
So when Secretary Clinton talks about this, I mean, I'll take the admirals and I'll take the generals any day over the political hacks that I see that have led our country so brilliantly over the last 10 years with their knowledge.
OK?
Because look at the mess that we're in.
Look at the mess that we're in.
As far as the cyber, I agree to parts of what Secretary Clinton said.
We should be better than anybody else, and perhaps we're not.
She's saying Russia, Russia, Russia, but I don't -- maybe it was.
It could also be lots of other people.
It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, OK?
But what did we learn with DNC?
We learned that Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of by your people, by Debbie Wasserman Schultz.
Look what happened to her.
But Bernie Sanders was taken advantage of.
That's what we learned.
We came in with the Internet, we came up with the Internet, and I think Secretary Clinton and myself would agree very much, when you look at what ISIS is doing with the Internet, they're beating us at our own game.
ISIS.
So we have to get very, very tough on cyber and cyber warfare.
It is -- it is a huge problem.
I have a son.
He's 10 years old.
He has computers.
He is so good with these computers, it's unbelievable.
The security aspect of cyber is very, very tough.
And maybe it's hardly doable.
But I will say, we are not doing the job we should be doing.
But that's true throughout our whole governmental society.
We have so many things that we have to do better, Lester, and certainly cyber is one of them.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I think there are a number of issues that we should be addressing.
I have put forth a plan to defeat ISIS.
It does involve going after them online.
I think we need to do much more with our tech companies to prevent ISIS and their operatives from being able to use the Internet to radicalize, even direct people in our country and Europe and elsewhere.
But we also have to intensify our air strikes against ISIS and eventually support our Arab and Kurdish partners to be able to actually take out ISIS in Raqqa, end their claim of being a Caliphate.
We're making progress.
Our military is assisting in Iraq.
And we're hoping that within the year we'll be able to push ISIS out of Iraq and then, you know, really squeeze them in Syria.
But we have to be cognizant of the fact that they've had foreign fighters coming to volunteer for them, foreign money, foreign weapons, so we have to make this the top priority.
And I would also do everything possible to take out their leadership.
I was involved in a number of efforts to take out Al Qaida leadership when I was secretary of state, including, of course, taking out bin Laden.
And I think we need to go after Baghdadi, as well, make that one of our organizing principles.
Because we've got to defeat ISIS, and we've got to do everything we can to disrupt their propaganda efforts online.
You mention ISIS, and we think of ISIS certainly as over there, but there are American citizens who have been inspired to commit acts of terror on American soil, the latest incident, of course, the bombings we just saw in New York and New Jersey, the knife attack at a mall in Minnesota, in the last year, deadly attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando.
I'll ask this to both of you.
Tell us specifically how you would prevent homegrown attacks by American citizens, Mr. Trump?
Well, first I have to say one thing, very important.
Secretary Clinton is talking about taking out ISIS.
We will take out ISIS.
So she talks about taking them out.
She's been doing it a long time.
She's been trying to take them out for a long time.
And then you wouldn't have had them.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I hope the fact-checkers are turning up the volume and really working hard.
That is absolutely proved over and over again.
Wrong.
Wrong.
But let's talk about the question you asked, Lester.
The question you asked is, what do we do here in the United States?
That's the most important part of this.
How do we prevent attacks?
How do we protect our people?
I was so proud of law enforcement in New York, in Minnesota, in New Jersey.
You know, they responded so quickly, so professionally to the attacks that occurred by Rahami.
And they brought him down.
And we may find out more information because he is still alive, which may prove to be an intelligence benefit.
So we've got to do everything we can to vacuum up intelligence from Europe, from the Middle East.
That means we've got to work more closely with our allies, and that's something that Donald has been very dismissive of.
We're working with NATO, the longest military alliance in the history of the world, to really turn our attention to terrorism.
We're working with our friends in the Middle East, many of which, as you know, are Muslim majority nations.
Donald has consistently insulted Muslims abroad, Muslims at home, when we need to be cooperating with Muslim nations and with the American Muslim community.
They're on the front lines.
They can provide information to us that we might not get anywhere else.
They need to have close working cooperation with law enforcement in these communities, not be alienated and pushed away as some of Donald's rhetoric, unfortunately, has led to.
Mr. Trump...
Well, I have to respond.
Please respond.
The secretary said very strongly about working with -- we've been working with them for many years, and we have the greatest mess anyone's ever seen.
You look at the Middle East, it's a total mess.
Under your direction, to a large extent.
But you look at the Middle East, you started the Iran deal, that's another beauty where you have a country that was ready to fall, I mean, they were doing so badly.
They were choking on the sanctions.
And now they're going to be actually probably a major power at some point pretty soon, the way they're going.
But when you look at NATO, I was asked on a major show, what do you think of NATO?
And you have to understand, I'm a businessperson.
I did really well.
But I have common sense.
And I said, well, I'll tell you.
And, number two, I said, and very strongly, NATO could be obsolete, because -- and I was very strong on this, and it was actually covered very accurately in the New York Times, which is unusual for the New York Times, to be honest -- but I said, they do not focus on terror.
And I was very strong.
And I said it numerous times.
It's a lot of money to protect other people.
But I'm all for NATO.
But I said they have to focus on terror, also.
And they're going to do that.
And believe me, you were the ones that took out the troops.
Not only that, you named the day.
They couldn't believe it.
They sat back probably and said, I can't believe it.
They said...
Lester, we've covered...
No, wait a minute.
We've covered this ground.
When they formed, when they formed, this is something that never should have happened.
It should have never happened.
Now, you're talking about taking out ISIS.
But you were there, and you were secretary of state when it was a little infant.
Now it's in over 30 countries.
And you're going to stop them?
I don't think so.
Mr. Trump, a lot of these are judgment questions.
You had supported the war in Iraq before the invasion.
What makes your
In 2002...
That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her, because she -- frankly, I think the best person in her campaign is mainstream media.
My question is, since you supported it...
Just -- would you like to hear...
... why is your -- why is your judgment...
Wait a minute.
Just so you put it out.
The record shows otherwise, but why -- why was...
Why was -- is your judgment any...
Essentially.
I then did an interview with Neil Cavuto.
We talked about the economy is more important.
I then spoke to Sean Hannity, which everybody refuses to call Sean Hannity.
I had numerous conversations with Sean Hannity at Fox.
And Sean Hannity said -- and he called me the other day -- and I spoke to him about it -- he said you were totally against the war, because he was for the war.
Why is your judgment better than...
And when he -- excuse me.
And that was before the war started.
Sean Hannity said very strongly to me and other people -- he's willing to say it, but nobody wants to call him.
I was against the war.
He said, you used to have fights with me, because Sean was in favor of the war.
And I understand that side, also, not very much, because we should have never been there.
But nobody called Sean Hannity.
And then they did an article in a major magazine, shortly after the war started.
I think in '04.
But they did an article which had me totally against the war in Iraq.
And one of your compatriots said, you know, whether it was before or right after, Trump was definitely -- because if you read this article, there's no doubt.
But if somebody -- and I'll ask the press -- if somebody would call up Sean Hannity, this was before the war started.
He and I used to have arguments about the war.
I said, it's a terrible and a stupid thing.
It's going to destabilize the Middle East.
And that's exactly what it's done.
It's been a disaster.
My reference was to what you had said in 2002, and my question was...
No, no.
You didn't hear what I said.
Why is your judgment -- why is your judgment any different than Mrs. Clinton's judgment?
Well, I have much better judgment than she does.
There's no question about that.
I also have a much better temperament than she has, you know?
(LAUGHTER)
I know how to win.
She does not have a...
Secretary Clinton?
Wait.
The AFL-CIO the other day, behind the blue screen, I don't know who you were talking to, Secretary Clinton, but you were totally out of control.
I said, there's a person with a temperament that's got a problem.
Secretary Clinton?
Whew, OK.
(LAUGHTER)
Let's talk about two important issues that were briefly mentioned by Donald, first, NATO.
You know, NATO as a military alliance has something called Article 5, and basically it says this: An attack on one is an attack on all.
And you know the only time it's ever been invoked?
After 9/11, when the 28 nations of NATO said that they would go to Afghanistan with us to fight terrorism, something that they still are doing by our side.
With respect to Iran, when I became secretary of state, Iran was weeks away from having enough nuclear material to form a bomb.
They had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle under the Bush administration.
They had built covert facilities.
They had stocked them with centrifuges that were whirling away.
And we had sanctioned them.
I voted for every sanction against Iran when I was in the Senate, but it wasn't enough.
And we did drive them to the negotiating table.
That's diplomacy.
That's coalition-building.
That's working with other nations.
The other day, I saw Donald saying that there were some Iranian sailors on a ship in the waters off of Iran, and they were taunting American sailors who were on a nearby ship.
That's not good judgment.
That would not start a war.
That is not the right temperament to be commander-in- chief, to be taunted.
And the worst part...
No, they were taunting us.
... of what we heard Donald say has been about nuclear weapons.
It has been the policy of the United States, Democrats and Republicans, to do everything we could to reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
... have a good time, folks.
It's lies.
And, in fact, his cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons is so deeply troubling.
That is the number-one threat we face in the world.
And it becomes particularly threatening if terrorists ever get their hands on any nuclear material.
So a man who can be provoked by a tweet should not have his fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes, as far as I think anyone with any sense about this should be concerned.
That line's getting a little bit old, I must say.
I would like to...
It's a good one, though.
It well describes the problem.
(LAUGHTER)
It's not an accurate one at all.
It's not an accurate one.
So I just want to give a lot of things -- and just to respond.
I agree with her on one thing.
The single greatest problem the world has is nuclear armament, nuclear weapons, not global warming, like you think and your -- your president thinks.
Nuclear is the single greatest threat.
That's why we're losing -- we're losing -- we lose on everything.
I say, who makes these -- we lose on everything.
All I said, that it's very possible that if they don't pay a fair share, because this isn't 40 years ago where we could do what we're doing.
We need to move on.
Well, wait, but it's very important.
All I said was, they may have to defend themselves or they have to help us out.
We're a country that owes $20 trillion.
They have to help us out.
Our last...
As far as the nuclear is concerned, I agree.
It is the single greatest threat that this country has.
Which leads to my next question, as we enter our last segment here (inaudible) the subject of securing America.
On nuclear weapons, President Obama reportedly considered changing the nation's longstanding policy on first use.
Do you support the current policy?
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes on that.
Well, I have to say that, you know, for what Secretary Clinton was saying about nuclear with Russia, she's very cavalier in the way she talks about various countries.
I looked the other night.
We are not -- we are not keeping up with other countries.
I would like everybody to end it, just get rid of it.
But I would certainly not do first strike.
I think that once the nuclear alternative happens, it's over.
At the same time, we have to be prepared.
I can't take anything off the table.
Because you look at some of these countries, you look at North Korea, we're doing nothing there.
And by the way, another one powerful is the worst deal I think I've ever seen negotiated that you started is the Iran deal.
Iran is one of their biggest trading partners.
Iran has power over North Korea.
And when they made that horrible deal with Iran, they should have included the fact that they do something with respect to North Korea.
And they should have done something with respect to Yemen and all these other places.
And when asked to Secretary Kerry, why didn't you do that?
Why didn't you add other things into the deal?
Nobody's ever seen that before.
That turned out to be wrong.
It was actually $1.7 billion in cash, obviously, I guess for the hostages.
It certainly looks that way.
So you say to yourself, why didn't they make the right deal?
The deal with Iran will lead to nuclear problems.
All they have to do is sit back 10 years, and they don't have to do much.
Your two minutes is expired.
And they're going to end up getting nuclear.
I met with Bibi Netanyahu the other day.
Believe me, he's not a happy camper.
All right.
Mrs. Clinton, Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.
Well, let me -- let me start by saying, words matter.
Words matter when you run for president.
And they really matter when you are president.
And I want to reassure our allies in Japan and South Korea and elsewhere that we have mutual defense treaties and we will honor them.
It is essential that America's word be good.
And so I know that this campaign has caused some questioning and worries on the part of many leaders across the globe.
I've talked with a number of them.
But I want to -- on behalf of myself, and I think on behalf of a majority of the American people, say that, you know, our word is good.
It's also important that we look at the entire global situation.
There's no doubt that we have other problems with Iran.
But personally, I'd rather deal with the other problems having put that lid on their nuclear program than still to be facing that.
And Donald never tells you what he would do.
Would he have started a war?
Would he have bombed Iran?
But it's like his plan to defeat ISIS.
He says it's a secret plan, but the only secret is that he has no plan.
So we need to be more precise in how we talk about these issues.
People around the word follow our presidential campaigns so closely, trying to get hints about what we will do.
Can they rely on us?
Are we going to lead the world with strength and in accordance with our values?
That's what I intend to do.
I intend to be a leader of our country that people can count on, both here at home and around the world, to make decisions that will further peace and prosperity, but also stand up to bullies, whether they're abroad or at home.
We cannot let those who would try to destabilize the world to interfere with American interests and security...
Your two minutes is...
... to be given any opportunities at all.
... is expired.
Lester, one thing I'd like to say.
Very quickly.
Twenty seconds.
I will go very quickly.
But I will tell you that Hillary will tell you to go to her website and read all about how to defeat ISIS, which she could have defeated by never having it, you know, get going in the first place.
Right now, it's getting tougher and tougher to defeat them, because they're in more and more places, more and more states, more and more nations.
Mr. Trump...
And it's a big problem.
And as far as Japan is concerned, I want to help all of our allies, but we are losing billions and billions of dollars.
We cannot be the policemen of the world.
We cannot protect countries all over the world...
We have just...
... where they're not paying us what we need.
We have just a few final questions...
And she doesn't say that, because she's got no business ability.
We need heart.
We need a lot of things.
But you have to have some basic ability.
And sadly, she doesn't have that.
All of the things that she's talking about could have been taken care of during the last 10 years, let's say, while she had great power.
But they weren't taken care of.
And if she ever wins this race, they won't be taken care of.
Mr. Trump, this year Secretary Clinton became the first woman nominated for president by a major party.
"Earlier this month, you said she doesn't have, quote, ""a presidential look."""
She's standing here right now.
What did you mean by that?
She doesn't have the look.
She doesn't have the stamina.
I said she doesn't have the stamina.
And I don't believe she does have the stamina.
To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.
"The quote was, ""I just don't think she has the presidential look."""
You have -- wait a minute.
Wait a minute, Lester.
You asked me a question.
Did you ask me a question?
You have to be able to negotiate our trade deals.
You have to be able to negotiate, that's right, with Japan, with Saudi Arabia.
Wait.
You have so many different things you have to be able to do, and I don't believe that Hillary has the stamina.
Let's let her respond.
(APPLAUSE)
The world -- let me tell you.
Let me tell you.
Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience.
We have made so many bad deals during the last -- so she's got experience, that I agree.
(APPLAUSE)
But it's bad, bad experience.
I agree.
She's got experience, but it's bad experience.
And this country can't afford to have another four years of that kind of experience.
We are at -- we are at the final question.
(APPLAUSE)
Well, one thing.
One thing, Lester.
Very quickly, because we're at the final question now.
You know, he tried to switch from looks to stamina.
.... women don't deserve equal pay unless they do as good a job as men.
I didn't say that.
And one of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest.
He loves beauty contests, supporting them and hanging around them.
Donald, she has a name.
Where did you find this?
Where did you find this?
Her name is Alicia Machado.
Where did you find this?
And she has become a U.S. citizen, and you can bet...
Oh, really?
... she's going to vote this November.
OK, good.
Let me just tell you...
(APPLAUSE)
Mr. Trump, could we just take 10 seconds and then we ask the final question...
You know, Hillary is hitting me with tremendous commercials.
Some of it's said in entertainment.
Some of it's said -- somebody who's been very vicious to me, Rosie O'Donnell, I said very tough things to her, and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her.
But you want to know the truth?
I was going to say something...
Please very quickly.
"... extremely rough to Hillary, to her family, and I said to myself, ""I can't do it."
I just can't do it.
It's inappropriate.
"It's not nice."""
But she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on negative ads on me, many of which are absolutely untrue.
They're untrue.
And they're misrepresentations.
And I will tell you this, Lester: It's not nice.
And I don't deserve that.
But it's certainly not a nice thing that she's done.
It's hundreds of millions of ads.
And the only gratifying thing is, I saw the polls come in today, and with all of that money...
We have to move on to the final question.
... $200 million is spent, and I'm either winning or tied, and I've spent practically nothing.
(APPLAUSE)
One of you will not win this election.
So my final question to you tonight, are you willing to accept the outcome as the will of the voters?
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I support our democracy.
And sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.
But I certainly will support the outcome of this election.
And I know Donald's trying very hard to plant doubts about it, but I hope the people out there understand: This election's really up to you.
It's not about us so much as it is about you and your families and the kind of country and future you want.
So I sure hope you will get out and vote as though your future depended on it, because I think it does.
Mr. Trump, very quickly, same question.
Will you accept the outcome as the will of the voters?
I want to make America great again.
Will you accept the outcome of the election?
Look, here's the story.
I want to make America great again.
I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't believe Hillary will.
The answer is, if she wins, I will absolutely support her.
(APPLAUSE)
All right.
Well, that is going to do it for us.
That concludes our debate for this evening, a spirit one.
We covered a lot of ground, not everything as I suspected we would.
The next presidential debates are scheduled for October 9th at Washington University in St. Louis and October 19th at the University of Nevada Las Vegas.
The conversation will continue.
A reminder.
The vice presidential debate is scheduled for October 4th at Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia.
My thanks to Hillary Clinton and to Donald Trump and to Hofstra University for hosting us tonight.
Good night, everyone.
Good evening.
From Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia, and welcome to the first, and only, vice presidential debate of 2016, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
I'm Elaine Quijano, anchor at CBSN, and correspondent for CBS News.
It's an honor to moderate this debate between Senator Tim Kaine and Governor Mike Pence.
Both are longtime public servants who are also proud fathers of sons serving in the U.S. Marines.
The campaigns have agreed to the rules of this 90-minute debate.
There will be nine different segments covering domestic and foreign policy issues.
Each segment will begin with a question to both candidates who will each have two minutes to answer.
Then I'll ask follow-up questions to facilitate a discussion between the candidates.
By coin toss, it's been determined that Senator Kaine will be first to answer the opening question.
We have an enthusiastic audience tonight.
They've agreed to only express that enthusiasm once at the end of the debate and right now as we welcome Governor Mike Pence and Senator Tim Kaine.
(APPLAUSE)
Gentlemen, welcome.
It truly is a privilege to be with both of you tonight.
I'd like to start with the topic of presidential leadership.
Twenty-eight years ago tomorrow night, Lloyd Bentsen said the vice presidential debate was not about the qualifications for the vice presidency, but about how if tragedy should occur, the vice president has to step in without any margin for error, without time for preparation, to take over the responsibility for the biggest job in the world.
What about your qualities, your skills, and your temperament equip you to step into that role at a moment's notice?
Senator Kaine?
Elaine, thank you for being here tonight, and, Governor Pence, welcome.
It is so great to be back at Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia.
This is a very special place.
Sixty-five years ago, a young, courageous woman, Barbara Johns, led a walkout of her high school, Moton High School.
She made history by protesting school segregation.
She believed our nation was stronger together.
And that walkout led to the Brown v. Board of Education decision that moved us down the path toward equality.
I am so proud to be running with another strong, history-making woman, Hillary Clinton, to be president of the United States.
I'm proud because her vision of stronger together, building an economy that works for all, not just those at the top, being safe in the world not only with a strong military, but also strong alliances to battle terrorism and climate change, and also to build a community of respect, just like Barbara Johns tried to do 65 years ago.
That's why I'm so proud to be her running mate.
Hillary told me why she asked me to be her running mate.
She said the test of a Clinton administration will not be the signing of a bill or the passage of a bill.
It'll be whether we can make somebody's life better, whether we can make a classroom better learning environment for schoolkids or teachers, whether we can make a safer -- it's going to be about results.
And she said to me, you've been a missionary and a civil rights lawyer.
You've been a city councilman and mayor.
You've been a lieutenant governor and governor and now a U.S. senator.
I think you will help me figure out how to govern this nation so that we always keep in mind that the success of the administration is the difference we make in people's lives.
And that's what I bring to the ticket, that experience having served at all levels of government.
But my primary role is to be Hillary Clinton's right-hand person and strong supporter as she puts together the most historic administration possible.
And I relish that role.
I'm so proud of her.
I'll just say this:  We trust Hillary Clinton, my wife and I, and we trust her with the most important thing in our life.
We trust Hillary Clinton as president and commander-in-chief, but the thought of Donald Trump as commander-in-chief scares us to death.
Governor Pence?
It's deeply humbling for me to be here, to be surrounded by my -- my wonderful family.
And, Senator Kaine, it's an honor to be here with you, as well.
And I just -- I also want to say -- I want to say thanks to everyone that's looking in tonight, who understands what an enormously important time this is in the life of our nation.
For the last seven-and-a-half years, we've seen America's place in the world weakened.
And so I want to thank all of you for being -- being with us tonight.
I also want to thank Donald Trump for making that call and inviting us to be a part of this ticket.
I have to tell you, I'm a -- I'm a small-town boy from a place not too different from Farmville.
I grew up with a cornfield in my backyard.
My grandfather had immigrated to this country when he was about my son's age.
My mom and dad built a -- everything that matters in a small town in Southern Indiana.
They built a family and -- and a good name and a business
And they raised a family.
And I dreamed some day of representing my home town in Washington, D.C., but I -- honestly, Elaine, I never imagined -- never imagined I'd have the opportunity to be governor of the state that I love, let alone be sitting at a table like this in this kind of a position.
So to answer your question, I would say I -- I would hope that if -- if the responsibility ever fell to me in this role, that I would meet it with the way that I'm going to meet the responsibility should I be elected vice president of the United States.
And that's to bring a lifetime of experience, a lifetime growing up in a small town, a lifetime where I've served in the Congress of the United States, where -- where I've led a state that works in the great state of Indiana, and whatever other responsibilities might follow from this, I -- I would hope and, frankly, I would pray to be able to meet that moment with that -- that lifetime of experience.
Senator Kaine, on the campaign trail, you praised Secretary Clinton's character, including her commitment to public service, yet 60 percent of voters don't think she's trustworthy.
Why do so many people distrust her?
Is it because they have questions about her e-mails and the Clinton Foundation?
Elaine, let me tell you why I trust Hillary Clinton.
Here's what people should look at as they look at a public servant.
Do they have a passion in their life that showed up before they were in public life?
And have they held onto that passion throughout their life, regardless of whether they were in office or not, succeeding or failing?
Hillary Clinton has that passion.
From a time as a kid in a Methodist youth group in the suburbs of Chicago, she has been focused on serving others with a special focus on empowering families and kids.
As a civil rights lawyer in the South, with the Children's Defense Fund, first lady of Arkansas and this country, senator, secretary of state, it's always been about putting others first.
And that's a sharp contrast with Donald Trump.
Donald Trump always puts himself first.
He built a business career, in the words of one of his own campaign staffers, "off the backs of the little guy."
It is so painful to suggest that we go back to think about these days where an African-American could not be a citizen of the United States.
And I can't imagine how Governor Pence can defend the insult- driven selfish "me first" style of Donald Trump.
Governor Pence, let me ask you, you have said Donald Trump is, quote, "thoughtful, compassionate, and steady."
Yet 67 percent of voters feel he is a risky choice, and 65 percent feel he does not have the right kind of temperament to be president.
Why do so many Americans think Mr. Trump is simply too erratic?
Well, let me -- let me say first and foremost that, Senator, you and Hillary Clinton would know a lot about an insult- driven campaign.
It really is remarkable.
You both have said...
... their heavy-handed approach.
Well...
(CROSSTALK)
Well, we're going to get to Russia in just a moment.
But I do want to get back to the question at...
But in the midst -- Elaine, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, I'll...
How can that...
(CROSSTALK)
Yes, and we will get to that, Senator.
We do have that coming up here.
But in the meantime, the questions...
Well, Senator, I must have hit a...
(CROSSTALK)
I must have hit a nerve here.
Why the disconnect?
Because at a time of great challenge in the life of this nation, where we've weakened America's place in the world, stifled America's economy, the campaign of Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine has been an avalanche of insults.
Look, to get to your question about trustworthiness, Donald Trump has built a business through hard times and through good times.
He's employed tens of thousands of people in this country.
(CROSSTALK)
And why the disconnect with your running mate?
But there's a -- there's a reason why people question the trustworthiness of Hillary Clinton.
And that's because they're paying attention.
You are Donald Trump's apprentice.
Let me talk about this...
(CROSSTALK)
Senator, I think I'm still on my time.
Well, I think -- isn't this a discussion?
This is our open discussion.
Yeah, let's talk about the state of...
(CROSSTALK)
Well, let me interrupt -- let me interrupt you and finish my sentence, if I can.
Finish your sentence.
OK, now I can weigh in.
Now...
She had a private server...
Now, I get to weigh in.
Now, let me just say this...
... that was discovered...
(CROSSTALK)
... Senator, you have an opportunity to respond.
Governor Pence -- Governor Pence doesn't think the world's going so well and he, you know, is going to say it's everybody's fault.
Do you?
Let me tell you this.
When Hillary Clinton became secretary of state, Governor Pence, did you know that Osama bin Laden was alive?
Yes.
Do you know that we had 175,000 troops deployed in the battlefield in Iraq and Afghanistan?
Do you know that Iran was racing toward a nuclear weapon and Russia was expanding its stockpile?
Under Secretary Clinton's leadership, she was part of the national team, public safety team that went after and revived the dormant hunt against bin Laden and wiped him off the face of the Earth.
Right and...
These are very, very good things.
Well, if you want to put more American troops in Iraq, you can propose that.
No, that is incorrect.
That's incorrect.
Gentlemen, we'll get to...
(CROSSTALK)
But I'd like to correct...
We need to move on to the next topic, gentlemen.
If Governor Pence wants to put more troops back in Iraq, that's
There are a lot of people wondering in this country about the economy.
Let's turn to the issue of the economy.
OK.
According to the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, neither of your economic plans will reduce the growing $19 trillion gross national debt.
In fact, your plans would add even more to it.
Both of you were governors who balanced state budgets.
Are you concerned that adding more to the debt could be disastrous for the country.
Governor Pence?
I mean, I'm very proud of the fact that -- I come from a state that works.
That's a little bit different than when Senator Kaine was governor here in Virginia.
He left his state about $2 billion in the hole.
It really is remarkable that they actually are advocating a trillion dollars in tax increases, which I get that.
You tried to raise taxes here in Virginia and were unsuccessful.
We can get America moving again.
Put on top of that the kind of trade deals that'll put the American worker first, and you've got a prescription for real growth.
And when you get the economy growing, Elaine, that's when you can deal with the national debt.
When we get back to 3.5 percent to 4 percent growth with Donald Trump's plan will do, then we're going to have the resources to meet our nation's needs at home and abroad, and we're going to have the ability to bring down the national debt.
Senator Kaine?
Elaine, on the economy, there's a fundamental choice for the American electorate.
Do you want a "you're hired" president in Hillary Clinton or do you want a "you're fired" president in Donald Trump?
I think that's not such a hard choice.
Hillary and I have a plan that's on the table that's a "you're hired" plan.
Five components.
First thing we do is we invest in manufacturing, infrastructure, and research in the clean energy jobs of tomorrow.
Second thing is we invest in our workforce, from pre-K education to great teachers to debt-free college and tuition-free college for families that make less than $125,000 a year.
Third, we promote fairness by raising the minimum wage, so you can't work full-time and be under the poverty level, and by paying women equal pay for equal work.
Fourth, we promote small business growth, just as we've done in Virginia, to make it easier to start and grow small businesses.
Hillary and I each grew up in small-business families.
My dad, who ran an iron working and welding shop, is here tonight.
And, fifth, we have a tax plan that targets tax relief to middle- class individuals and small businesses and asks those at the very top who've benefited as we've come out of recession to pay more.
And Donald Trump -- why would he do this?
Because his tax plan basically helps him.
And if he ever met his promise and he gave his tax returns to the American public like he said he would, we would see just how much his economic plan is really a Trump-first plan.
Yesterday, Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible.
Does that seem fair to you?
Well, first, let me say, I appreciated the "you're hired," "you're fired" thing, Senator.
You use that a whole lot.
And I think your running mate used a lot of pre-done lines.
Look, what -- what you all just heard out there is more taxes, $2 trillion in more spending, more deficits, more debt, more government.
And if you think that's all working, then you look at the other side of the table.
Fifteen million new jobs?
Governor...
(CROSSTALK)
You -- honestly, Senator, you can roll out the numbers and the sunny side, but I got to tell you, people in Scranton know different.
People in Fort Wayne, Indiana, know different.
I mean, this economy is struggling.
The answer to this economy is not more taxes.
But it's not the giveaway tax relief to the folks at the top.
It's not more spending...
(CROSSTALK)
I am interested to hear whether he'll defend his running mate's not releasing taxes and not paying taxes.
Absolutely I will.
Governor, with all due respect, the question was about whether it seems fair to you that Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible.
Well, this is probably the difference between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton and Senator Kaine.
And, I mean, Hillary Clinton and Senator Kaine -- God bless you for it, career public servants, that's great -- Donald Trump is a businessman, not a career politician.
He actually built a business.
Those tax returns that were -- that came out publicly this week show that he faced some pretty tough times 20 years ago.
But like virtually every other business, including the New York Times not too long ago, he used what's called net operating loss.
We have a tax code, Senator, that actually is designed to encourage entrepreneurship in this country.
But why won't he release his tax returns?
Well, we're answering the question about -- about a business thing, is he...
I do want to come back to that, but...
And he did it brilliantly.
How do you know that?
You haven't seen his tax returns.
How do you know that?
And with regard to paying taxes, this whole riff about not paying taxes and people saying he didn't pay taxes for years, Donald Trump has created tens of thousands of jobs.
And he's paid payroll taxes, sales taxes, property taxes...
Elaine, let me talk about something.
Senator, I'm going to give you about 30 seconds to respond, and I have question on Social Security for you.
OK.
The only issue on taxes -- Hillary Clinton is going to raise taxes, and Donald Trump and I are going to cut them.
He's broken his first...
Second, he stood on the stage...
He said he's...
So it's smart not to pay for our military?
It's smart not to pay for veterans?
It's smart not to pay for teachers?
And I guess all of us who do pay for those things, I guess we're stupid.
And the last thing I'll say is this...
Senator, do you take all the deductions that you're entitled to?
The last thing -- the last thing I want to ask Governor Pence is...
I do.
Elaine, I have to respond to this.
You get very little time, 20 seconds.
I'll be -- I'll be very respectful.
Governor?
But he said he would release his tax returns.
All right, Gentlemen...
The American people can review that.
And he's going -- Senator, he's going to release his tax returns when the audit is over...
... I need to ask you about Social Security...
Gentlemen...
If you can't meet Nixon's standard...
The people at home cannot understand either one of you when you speak over each other.
I would please ask you to wait until it is that the other is finished.
All right.
We're having fun up here.
The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimates your benefits could be cut by as much as $7,500 per year.
What would your administration do to prevent this cut?
First, we're going to protect Social Security, which is one of the greatest programs that the American government has ever done.
It happened at a time when you would work your whole life, your whole life, raising your kids, working, being a Little League coach or a Sunday school teacher, and then you would retire into poverty.
And Social Security has enabled people to retire with dignity and overwhelmingly not be in poverty.
We have to keep it solvent.
And we will keep it solvent.
And we'll look for strategies like adjusting the payroll tax cap upward in order to do that.
Here's what Hillary and I will not do.
And I want to make this very plain.
We're going to stand up against efforts to privatize Social Security.
Governor Pence, I'll give you an opportunity to respond.
Well, thanks, Elaine.
There they go again.
OK...
Go read -- go read the book.
All Donald Trump -- all Donald Trump and I have said about Social Security is we're going to meet our obligations to our seniors.
That's it.
Go read the book.
That's what this campaign is really about, Senator.
And I get, this is -- this is the old scare tactic that they roll out...
But -- but you have a voting record, Governor.
And I get all of that.
I just, look...
I...
There's a question that you asked a little bit earlier that I want to go back to.
I can't believe that you won't defend your own voting record.
I have to go back to.
We...
Well, look, I -- you're running with Hillary Clinton, who wants to raise taxes by $1 trillion, increase spending by $2 trillion, and you say you're going to keep the promises of Social Security.
We're going to -- we're going to -- we're going to...
All right.
And we're going to face hard choices and...
(CROSSTALK)
Gentleman, I want to move on now.
All right.
Let me move on now...
Three hundred and five (ph) economists said your plan is bad for the economy.
... to the issue of law enforcement and race relations.
Law enforcement and race relations.
After the Dallas police shooting, Police Chief David Brown said, quote, "We're asking cops to do too much in this country.
Every societal failure we put it off on the cops to solve.
Not enough mental health funding, not enough drug addiction funding, schools fail, let's give it to the cops."
Do we ask too much of police officers in this country?
And how would you specifically address the chief's concerns?
Senator Kaine?
Elaine, I think that's a very fair comment.
I think we put a lot on police shoulders.
And this is something I got a lot of scar tissue and experience on.
I was a city councilman and mayor in Richmond.
And when I came in, we had one of the highest homicide rates in the United States.
We fought very, very hard over the course of my time in local office with our police department, and we reduced our homicide rate nearly in half.
And then when I was governor of Virginia, we worked hard, too.
And we did something we had really wanted to do.
For the first time ever, we cracked the top 10, 10 safest states, because we worked together.
Here's what I learned as a mayor and a governor.
The way you make communities safer and the way you make police safer is through community policing.
You build the bonds between the community and the police force, build bonds of understanding, and then when people feel comfortable in their communities, that gap between the police and the communities they serve narrows.
And when that gap narrows, it's safer for the communities and it's safer for the police.
That model still works across our country, but there are some other models that don't work, an overly aggressive, more militarized model.
Donald Trump recently said we need to do more stop-and-frisk around the country.
That would be a big mistake because it polarizes the relationship between the police and the community.
So here's what we'll do.
We'll focus on community policing.
We will focus on -- and Hillary Clinton has rolled out a really comprehensive mental health reform package that she worked on with law enforcement professionals, and we will also fight the scourge of gun violence in the United States.
And if we do, we won't have the tragedies that we did.
One of those killed at Virginia Tech was a guy named Liviu Librescu.
He was a 70-plus-year-old Romanian Holocaust survivor.
He had survived the Holocaust.
Then he survived the Soviet Union takeover of his country.
But then he was a visiting professor at Virginia Tech, and he couldn't survive the scourge of gun violence.
We can support the Second Amendment and do things like background record checks and make us safer, and that will make police safer, too.
Governor Pence?
You know, my uncle was a cop, a career cop, on the beat in downtown Chicago.
He was my hero when I was growing up.
And we'd go up to visit my dad's family in Chicago.
My three brothers and I would marvel at my uncle when he would come out in his uniform, sidearm at his side.
Police officers are the best of us.
And the men and women, white, African-American, Asian, Latino, Hispanic, they put their lives on the line every single day.
And let my say, at the risk of agreeing with you, community policing is a great idea.
It's worked in the Hoosier state.
And we fully support that.
Donald Trump and I are going to make sure that law enforcement have the resources and the tools to be able to really restore law and order to the cities and communities in this nation.
And that really has got to stop.
I mean, when an African-American police officer in Charlotte named Brentley Vinson, an all-star football player who went to Liberty University here in the state, came home, followed his dad into law enforcement, joined the force in Charlotte, joined the force in Charlotte in 2014, was involved in a police action shooting that claimed the life of Keith -- Keith Lamont Scott, it was a tragedy.
I mean, I -- we -- we mourn with those who mourn.
We -- we grieve with those who grieve.
And we're saddened at the loss of life.
I just think...
Can I explain
... I just think what we ought to do is we ought to stop seizing on these moments of tragedy.
We ought to assure the public that we'll have a full and complete and transparent investigation whenever there's a loss of life because of police action.
But, Senator, please, you know, enough of this seeking every opportunity to demean law enforcement broadly by making the accusation of implicit bias every time tragedy occurs.
Elaine -- Elaine, people shouldn't be afraid to bring up issues of bias in law enforcement.
And if you're afraid to have...
I'm not afraid to bring that up.
And if -- if you're afraid to have the discussion, you'll never solve it.
And so here's -- here's an example, heartbreaking.
We would agree this was a heartbreaking example.
The guy, Philando Castile, who was killed in St. Paul, he was a worker, a valued worker in a local school.
And he was killed for no apparent reason in an incident that will be discussed and will be investigated.
But when folks went and explored this situation, what they found is that Philando Castile, who was a -- they called him Mr. Rogers with Dreadlocks in the school that he worked.
The kids loved him.
We need criminal justice reform.
Well, we do.
Indiana has passed criminal justice reform.
But I just want to say, those who say that we should not...
But that's not what you're talking about.
... we should not be able to bring up and talk about bias in the system, we'll never solve the problem...
Governor Pence...
(CROSSTALK)
Governor Pence...
Well, I guess I can't believe you are defending the position that there is no bias and it's a topic we don't even...
(CROSSTALK)
Governor Pence, I have a question on that point.
I did not make that statement.
I...
A U.S. senator.
He said, "I have felt the anger, the frustration, the sadness, and the humiliation that comes with feeling like you're being targeted for nothing more than being just yourself."
What would you say to Senator Scott about his experiences?
Well, I have the deepest respect for Senator Scott, and he's a close friend.
And what I would say is that we -- we need to adopt criminal justice reform nationally.
I -- I signed criminal justice reform in the state of Indiana, Senator, and we're very proud of it.
I worked when I was Congress on a second chance act.
We have got to do a better job recognizing and correcting the errors in the system that do reflect on institutional bias in criminal justice.
But what -- what -- what Donald Trump and I are saying is let's not have the reflex of assuming the worst of men and women in law enforcement.
We truly do believe that law enforcement is not a force for racism or division in our country...
Elaine, can I
So what would you say to Senator Scott, Governor?
Law enforcement in this country is a force for good.
They are the -- they truly are people that put their lives on the line every single day.
But I would -- I would suggest to you, what we need to do is assert a stronger leadership at the national level to support law enforcement.
You just heard Senator Kaine reject stop-and-frisk.
Elaine, let me -- let me...
Governor, the question is about Senator Scott.
What would -- what would you tell Senator Scott?
Elaine, if I could -- if I could jump in.
I've heard Senator Scott make that eloquent plea.
And look, criminal justice is about respecting the law and being respected by the law.
So there is a fundamental respect issue here.
And I just want to talk about the tone that's set from the top.
All right.
I want to turn to our next segment now, immigration.
Your running mates have both said that undocumented immigrants who have committed violent crimes should be deported.
What would you tell the millions of undocumented immigrants who have not committed violent crimes?
Governor Pence?
But I -- Donald Trump has a plan that he laid out in Arizona, that will deal systemically with illegal immigration, beginning with border security, internal enforcement.
It's probably why for the first time in the history of Immigration and Customs Enforcement their union actually endorsed Donald Trump as the next president of the United States, because they know they need help to enforce the laws of this country.
And Donald Trump has laid out a priority to remove criminal aliens, remove people that have overstayed their visas.
And -- and once we have accomplished all of that, which will -- which will strengthen our economy, strengthen the rule of law in the country and make our communities safer once the criminal aliens are out, then we'll deal with those that remain.
But I have to tell you, I just -- I was listening to the avalanche of insults coming out of Senator Kaine a minute ago.
These were Donald's -- hold on a second, Governor.
(CROSSTALK)
It's my time, Senator.
It is, in fact, the governor's time.
I apologize.
It's your two minutes.
I apologize.
Thanks.
I forgive you.
He says ours is an insult-driven campaign.
Did you all just hear that?
Ours is an insult-driven campaign?
I mean, it's extraordinary.
And then she labeled one after another "ism" on millions of Americans who believe that we can have a stronger America at home and abroad, who believe we can get this economy moving again, who believe that we can end illegal immigration once and for all.
So, Senator, this -- this insult-driven campaign, I mean...
Governor...
That's small potatoes compared to Hillary Clinton...
Senator Kaine?
.... calling half of Donald Trump's supporters a basket of deplorables.
Hillary Clinton said something on the campaign trail, and the very next day, she said, you know what, I shouldn't have said that.
She said she shouldn't have said half.
Governor, this is Senator Kaine's two minutes, please.
Yeah, that's right, so now we're even.
Yeah.
(LAUGHTER)
Oh...
... to Donald Trump apologizing for calling women slobs, pigs, dogs, disgusting.
She apologized for saying "half."
Governor.
It is his two minutes, please.
Did Donald Trump apologize for taking after somebody in a Twitter war and making fun of her weight?
Immigration.
There's two plans on the table.
Donald Trump believes in deportation nation.
You've got to pick your choice.
Hillary and I want a bipartisan reform that will put keeping families together as the top goal, second, that will help focus enforcement efforts on those who are violent, third, that will do more border control, and, fourth, that will provide a path to citizenship for those who work hard, pay taxes, play by the rules, and take criminal background record checks.
That's our proposal.
And both Donald Trump and Mike Pence want to get rid of birthright citizenship.
So if you're born here, but your parents don't have documents, they want to eliminate that.
That's another 4.5 million people.
And I cannot believe...
That's nonsense.
I cannot believe that Governor Pence would sit here and defend his running mate's claim that we should create a deportation force to -- so that they'll all be gone.
It's called Immigrations and Customs Enforcement.
So you like the 16 million deportations?
Senator, that's -- that's nonsense.
That's...
(CROSSTALK)
We all know the routine.
It's amnesty.
And you heard one of the last things he mentioned was border security.
That's how Washington always plays it.
No, I...
They always say we're going to do this, we're going to do that, we'll eventually get the border...
(CROSSTALK)
... border security three years ago, and Governor Pence was against it.
Governor, Mr. Trump has said...
Ronald Reagan said a nation without borders is not a nation.
Donald Trump is committed to restoring the borders of this nation and securing our nation, enforcing our laws.
So, Governor, how would these millions of undocumented immigrants leave?
Would they be forcibly removed?
Well, I think Donald Trump laid out a series of priorities that doesn't ends with border security.
It begins with border security.
And after we secure the border, not only build a wall, but beneath the ground and in the air, we do internal enforcement.
But he said the focus has to be on criminal aliens.
We just -- we just had a conversation about law enforcement.
We just had a conversation about the -- the violence that's besetting our cities.
Donald Trump has said we're going to move those people out, people who've overstayed their visas.
We're going to enforce the law of this country.
We're going to strengthen Immigrations and Customs Enforcements with more resources and more personnel to be able to do that.
And then Donald Trump has made it clear, once we've done all of those things, that we're going to reform the immigration system that we have...
I just have to correct Governor Pence....
... where people can come into this country.
I have to...
That's the order that you should do it.
Border security, removing criminal aliens, upholding with law, and then -- but then, Senator, I'll work you when you go back to the Senate, I promise you, we'll work you to reform the immigration system.
I look forward to working together in whatever capacities we serve in.
But I just want to make it very, very clear that he's trying to fuzz up what Donald Trump has said.
And to add...
He's talking about criminal aliens.
And to add to it, and to add to it, and to add to it, we are a nation of immigrants.
Mike Pence and I both are descended from immigrant families.
Some things, you know, maybe weren't said so great about the Irish when they came, but we've done well by absorbing immigrants, and it's made our nation stronger.
Gentleman, I'd like to shift now to the threat of terrorism.
Do you think the world today is a safer or more dangerous place than it was eight years ago?
Has the terrorist threat increased or decreased?
Senator Kaine?
The terrorist threat has decreased in some ways, because bin Laden is dead.
The terrorist threat has decreased in some ways because an Iranian nuclear weapons program has been stopped.
The terrorist threat to United States troops has been decreased in some ways because there's not 175,000 in a dangerous part of the world.
There's only 15,000.
But there are other parts of the world that are challenging.
Let me tell you this: To beat terrorism, there's only one candidate who can do it, and it's Hillary Clinton.
Remember, Hillary Clinton was the senator from New York on 9/11.
She was there at the World Trade Center when they were still searching for victims and survivors.
That's seared onto her, the need to beat terrorism.
And she's got a plan to do it.
She was part of the national security team that wiped out bin Laden.
Here's her plan to defeat ISIL.
First, we've got to keep taking out their leaders on the battlefield.
She was part of the team that got bin Laden, and she'll lead the team that will get Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the head of ISIS.
Second, we've got to disrupt financing networks, third, disrupt their ability to recruit on the Internet, in their safe havens.
But, fourth, we also have to work with allies to share and surge intelligence.
That's the Hillary Clinton plan; she's got the experience to do it.
Donald Trump.
Donald Trump can't start a Twitter war with Miss Universe without shooting himself in the foot.
But he does have dangerous ideas.
Here's four.
He trash talks the military.
He wants to tear up alliances.
NATO is obsolete, and we'll only work together with Israel if they pay "big league."
Third, he loves dictators.
Oh, please.
Come on.
... and Saddam Hussein.
I'd love to hear Governor Pence tell me what's so enjoyable or comical about nuclear war.
Governor Pence?
Did you work on that one a long time?
Because that had a lot of really creative lines in it.
Well, I'm going to see if you can defend any of it.
Well, look, I can defend -- I -- I -- I can -- I can make very clear to the American people, after traveling millions of miles as our secretary of state, after being the architect of the foreign policy of this administration, America is less safe today than it was the day that Barack Obama became president of the United States.
It's absolutely inarguable.
It's been a combination of factors, but mostly it's been a lack of leadership.
I mean, I will give you -- and I was in Washington, D.C., on 9/11.
I saw the clouds of smoke rise from the Pentagon.
I was in Virginia where the Pentagon's...
(CROSSTALK)
I know you were.
We all lived through that day as a nation.
It was heartbreaking.
And I want to give this president credit for bringing Osama bin Laden to justice.
But the truth is, Osama bin Laden led Al Qaida.
Our primary threat today is ISIS.
My heart breaks for the likes of Lance Cpl.
Scott Zubowski
He fell in Fallujah in 2005.
He fought hard through some of the most difficult days in Operation Iraqi Freedom, and he paid the ultimate sacrifice to defend our freedom and secure that nation.
And that nation was secured in 2009.
But because Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama failed to provide a status of forces agreement and leave sufficient troops in there, we are back at war.
The president just ordered more troops on the ground.
We are back at war in Iraq.
And Scott Zubowski, whose mom would always come to Memorial Day events in Newcastle, Indiana, to see me, and I'd give her a hug and tell her we're never going to forget her son and we never will, Scott Zubowski and the sacrifices the American soldier made were squandered in Iraq because this administration created a vacuum in which ISIS was able to grow.
And a reference to the Iranian deal, the Iranian deal that Hillary Clinton initiated, $150 billion to the radical mullahs in Iran.
Stopping a nuclear weapons program without firing a shot?
You didn't stop the nuclear weapons program.
Yes, we did.
You essentially...
Even the Israeli military says it stopped.
... guaranteed that Iran will someday become a nuclear power, because there's no limitations once the period of time of the treaty comes off.
But that does not address many of the recent terrorist attacks in the United States, such as the Orlando nightclub massacre and the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey.
Those were homegrown, committed by U.S. citizens and legal residents.
What specific tools would you use to prevent those kinds of attacks?
Well, I think it's -- I think it's a great question, Elaine, but it really does begin with us reforming our immigration system and putting the interests, particularly the safety and security of the American people, first.
I mean, Donald Trump has called for extreme vetting for people coming into this country so that we don't bring people into the United States who are hostile to our Bill of Rights freedoms, who are hostile to the American way life.
But also, Donald Trump and I are committed to suspending the Syrian refugee program and programs and immigration from areas of the world that have been compromised by terrorism.
(CROSSTALK)
Elaine, I want to...
(CROSSTALK)
Governor, the question was about homegrown.
Yeah, and so -- but first, you know, let's make sure we're putting the safety and security of the American people first instead of Hillary Clinton expanding the Syrian refugee program...
That's not -- that's absolutely false.
That's what the Seventh Circuit decided just -- here's the difference, Elaine.
The Seventh Circuit...
We have different views on -- on refugee issues and on immigration.
Hillary and I want to do enforcement based on, are people dangerous?
That's absolutely false.
And with respect to refugees, we want to keep people out if they're dangerous.
Donald Trump said keep them out if they're Muslim.
Absolutely...
Right.
Right.
... and said it was discriminatory...
And those judges -- those judges said...
We should focus upon danger, not upon discrimination.
Governor?
Elaine, to your point, those judges said it was because there wasn't any evidence yet that -- that ISIS had infiltrated the United States.
Well, Germany just arrested three Syrian refugees that were connected to ISIS.
(CROSSTALK)
But they told you there's a right way and a wrong way to do it.
But, look, if you're going to be critical of me on that, that's fair game.
But, Governor Pence...
So you bet I suspended that program.
But, Governor Pence, I just...
And I stand by that decision.
And if I'm vice president of the United States or Donald Trump is president, we're going to put the safety and security of the American people first.
Sure.
Can we just be clear -- Hillary and I will do immigration enforcement and we'll vet refugees based on whether they're dangerous or not.
We won't do it based on discriminating against you from the country you come from or the religion that you practice.
But the problem with that...
That is completely antithetical to the Jeffersonian values of...
(CROSSTALK)
Yes, we can, and when we don't let them know, we don't let them in.
So -- the FBI...
When we don't know who they are, we don't let them in.
The FBI and homeland security said we can't know for certain.
You've got to err on the side of the safety and security of the American people, Senator.
I understand the...
By trashing all Syrians or trashing all Muslims?
... the U.N. wants us to expand the Syrian refugee program...
Senator Kaine, let me ask you this.
Secretary Clinton...
We're going to put the safety and security of the American people first.
... has talked about an intelligence surge.
Yes.
What exactly would an intelligence surge look like?
And how would that help identify terrorists with no operational connection to a foreign terrorist organization?
Intelligence surge is two-thirds, Elaine.
It's two things.
So it involves increasing our own workforce, but striking great partnerships with some of our cyber and intel experts in the private sector so that we can, consistent with constitutional principles, gather more intelligence.
But the second piece of this is really, really important.
It also means creating stronger alliances, because you gather intelligence and then you share your intelligence back and forth with allies.
And that's how you find out who may be trying to recruit, who may be trying to come to one country or the next.
Alliances are critical.
And, look, if you put aside -- push aside your alliances, who you're going to share intelligence with?
Hillary Clinton is the secretary of state who knows how to build alliances.
She built the sanctions regime around the word that stopped the Iranian nuclear weapons program.
And that's what an intelligence surge means.
Better skill and capacity, but also better alliances.
All right.
I'd like to turn now to the tragedy in Syria.
Two hundred fifty thousand...
Can I speak about the cybersecurity surge at all?
You can -- you can have 30 seconds, Governor, quickly, please.
First, Donald Trump just spoke about this issue this week.
We have got to bring together the best resources of this country to understand that cyber warfare is the new warfare of the asymmetrical enemies that we face in this country.
And I look forward if I'm privileged to be in this role of working with you in the Senate to make sure that we resource that effort.
We will work together in whatever roles we inhabit.
We have an intelligence, sir (ph).
And I don't -- 30 seconds is on up.
Right.
(CROSSTALK)
I'd like to ask you about Syria, Governor.
We could put cybersecurity first if we just make sure the next secretary of state doesn't have a private server.
(CROSSTALK)
All right, we are moving on now.
Two hundred fifty thousand people...
If your son or my son handled classified information the way Hillary Clinton did...
... one hundred thousand of them children -- Governor...
... they'd be court martialed.
That is absolutely false and you know that.
Absolutely true.
And you know that, Governor.
Governor...
It's absolutely true.
Gentlemen, please.
Gentlemen.
Sorry.
Senator Kaine, Governor Pence, please.
Syria.
I want to turn now to Syria.
Two hundred fifty thousand people, 100,000 of them children, are under siege in Aleppo, Syria.
Bunker buster bombs, cluster munitions, and incendiary weapons are being dropped on them by Russian and Syrian militaries.
Does the U.S. have a responsibility to protect civilians and prevent mass casualties on this scale, Governor Pence?
The United States of America needs to begin to exercise strong leadership to protect the vulnerable citizens and over 100,000 children in Aleppo.
And the small and bullying leader of Russia is now dictating terms to the United States to the point where all the United States of America -- the greatest nation on Earth -- just withdraws from talks about a cease-fire while Vladimir Putin puts a missile defense system in Syria while he marshals the forces and begins -- look, we have got to begin to lean into this with strong, broad-shouldered American leadership.
It begins by rebuilding our military.
And the Russians and the Chinese have been making enormous investments in the military.
We have the smallest Navy since 1916.
We have the lowest number of troops since the end of the Second World War.
We've got to work with Congress, and Donald Trump will, to rebuild our military and project American strength in the world.
But about Aleppo and about Syria, I truly do believe that what America ought to do right now is immediately establish safe zones, so that families and vulnerable families with children can move out of those areas, work with our Arab partners, real time, right now, to make that happen.
And secondly, I just have to tell you that the provocations by Russia need to be met with American strength.
And if Russia chooses to be involved and continue, I should say, to be involved in this barbaric attack on civilians in Aleppo, the United States of America should be prepared to use military force to strike military targets of the Assad regime to prevent them from this humanitarian crisis that is taking place in Aleppo.
There's a broad range of other things that we ought to do, as well.
Governor, your two minutes are up.
We've just got to have American strength on the world stage.
When Donald Trump becomes president of the United States, the Russians and other countries in the world will know they're dealing with a strong American president.
Senator Kaine?
Hillary and I also agree that the establishment of humanitarian zones in northern Syria with the provision of international human aid, consistent with the U.N. Security Council resolution that was passed in February 2014, would be a very, very good idea.
And Hillary also has the ability to stand up to Russia in a way that this ticket does not.
Vladimir Putin has run his economy into the ground.
If you don't know the difference between dictatorship and leadership, then you got to go back to a fifth-grade civics class.
I'll tell you what offends me...
Well, that offended me.
Governor Pence just said -- Governor Pence just said that Donald Trump will rebuild the military.
No, he won't.
Donald Trump is avoiding paying taxes.
The New York Times story -- and we need to get this -- but the New York Times suggested that he probably didn't pay taxes for about 18 years starting in 1995.
Those years included the years of 9/11.
So get this.
On 9/11, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's hometown was attacked by the worst terrorist attack in the history of the United States.
Young men and women -- young men and women signed up to serve in the military to fight terrorism.
Hillary Clinton went to Washington to get funds to rebuild her city and protect first responders, but Donald Trump was fighting a very different fight.
It was a fight to avoid paying taxes so that he wouldn't support the fight against terror.
The question was about Aleppo, Senator.
He wouldn't support troops.
He wouldn't -- he wouldn't support -- this is important, Elaine.
When a guy running for president will not support the troops, not support veterans, not support teachers, that's really important.
Right.
And I said about Aleppo, we do agree the notion is we have to create a humanitarian zone in northern Syria.
It's very important.
Governor Pence, you had mentioned no-fly zone.
Where would you propose setting up a safe zone specifically?
How would you keep it safe?
Well, first and foremost, Donald Trump supports our troops.
Donald Trump supports our veterans.
He won't pay taxes.
Donald Trump has paid all the taxes that he's -- do you not take deductions?
How does that work?
Gentlemen, this is about Syria.
I'd like to...
(CROSSTALK)
Honestly, Senator.
Honestly, Senator.
It is about our troops.
It is about our troops.
I understand why you want to change -- I understand why you want to change the subject.
How can you support the troops if you won't pay taxes?
I understand why you want to change the subject.
And let me be very clear on this Russian thing.
The larger question here...
Do you think Donald Trump is smart to not pay taxes?
Gentlemen, we're going to have time to get to Russia here.
What we're dealing with is the -- you know, there's an old proverb that says the Russian bear never dies, it just hibernates.
And all the while, all we do is fold our arms and say we're not having talks anymore.
To answer your question, we just need American strength.
We need to -- we need to marshal the resources of our allies in the region, and in the immediate, we need to act and act now to get people out of harm's way.
And exactly how would those safe zones work?
How would they remain safe?
The -- the safe zones would have to be -- as the senator said, there's already a framework for this that's been recognized by the international community.
The United States of America needs to be prepared to work with our allies in the region to create a route for safe passage and then to protect people in those areas, including with a no-fly zone.
But, look, this is very tough stuff.
I served on the Foreign Affairs Committee for a decade.
I traveled in and out of that region for 10 years.
I saw what the American soldier won in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
And to see the weak and feckless leadership that Hillary Clinton was the architect of and the foreign policy of the Obama administration...
Well, let me -- let me come back...
... is deeply troubling to me.
That will all change the day Donald Trump becomes president of the United States.
... and talk about -- let me talk about the things that Governor Pence doesn't want to acknowledge, Elaine.
He doesn't want to acknowledge...
We didn't.
... that Hillary was part of a team that got bin Laden.
He doesn't want to acknowledge...
I just did.
... that it's a good thing, not a bad thing, that it's a good thing -- not a bad thing -- that we're down from 175,000 troops deployed overseas to 15,000.
But let me tell you what will really make the Middle East dangerous.
Ronald Reagan said something really interesting about nuclear proliferation back in the 1980s.
He said the problem with nuclear proliferation is that some fool or maniac could trigger a catastrophic event.
And I think that's who Governor Pence's running mate is, exactly who Governor Reagan warned us about.
And come on.
Senator.
Senator, that was even beneath you and Hillary Clinton.
And that -- that's pretty low.
But do you -- do you think -- do you think we should have -- more nuclear weapons in the world will make us safer?
Senator, the...
That's what Donald Trump thinks.
Ronald Reagan also said nuclear war should never be fought because it can never be won.
And the United States of America needs to make investments in modernizing our nuclear force for both deterrence...
But can you defend Donald Trump's claim that more nations should get nuclear weapons?
... and assurance to our allies.
But let me go back to this Iran thing.
I mean, he keeps saying that they prevented -- that Hillary Clinton started the deal with the Iranians prevented Iran from getting a nuclear weapon.
(CROSSTALK)
That's what the Israeli joint chiefs of staff is saying right now.
Well, that's not what -- that's not what Israel thinks.
Gadi Eizenkot, you can go check it.
You wouldn't necessarily know that.
Go to the tape.
I know you boycotted Prime Minister Netanyahu's speech when he came before the Congress.
No, I visited him in his office.
I visited him in his office.
You boycotted the speech.
The point is, what this Iran -- so-called Iran deal did was essentially guarantee -- I mean, when I was in Congress, I fought hard on a bipartisan basis with Republican and Democrat members to move forward the toughest sanctions, it -- literally in the history of the United States, against Iran.
And then Hillary used them to get a deal.
We were bringing them to heel, but the goal was always that we would only lift the sanctions if Iran permanently renounced their nuclear ambitions.
Elaine, let me just mention one thing.
(CROSSTALK)
They have not -- Elaine, let me finish a sentence.
They have not renounced their nuclear ambitions.
And when the deal's period runs out, there's no limitation on them obtaining weapons.
That...
(CROSSTALK)
And very quickly, Senator.
Elaine...
We need to talk about Russia.
Very quickly, though, Senator, please.
... is astonishing to the American people.
Six times tonight, I have said to Governor Pence I can't imagine how you can defend your running mate's position on one issue after the next.
And in all six cases, he's refused to defend his running mate.
Well, let's -- no, no, don't put words in my mouth.
All right.
He's going...
(CROSSTALK)
And yet he is asking everybody to vote for somebody that he cannot defend.
And I just think that should be underlined.
No, I'm -- look...
(CROSSTALK)
All right, gentlemen, let's talk about Russia.
This is a topic that has come up.
I'm very, very happy to defend Donald Trump.
If he wants to take these one at a time, I'll take them one at a time.
I will give you an opportunity to do that.
Try to defend that.
He absolutely said it.
Saudi Arabia, South Korea and Japan
Most of the stuffy you've said, he's never said.
Russia
Russian President Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine, annexed Crimea, and has provided crucial military support to the Assad regime.
What steps, if any, would your administration take to counter these actions?
Senator Kaine?
You've got to be tough on Russia.
So let's start with not praising Vladimir Putin as a great leader.
Donald Trump and Mike Pence have said he's a great leader.
And Donald Trump has business...
No, we haven't.
... has business dealings -- has business dealings with Russia that he refuses to disclose.
Hillary Clinton has gone toe-to- toe with Russia.
She went toe-to-toe with Russia as secretary of state to do the New START Agreement to reduce Russia's nuclear stockpile.
She's had the experience doing it.
She went toe-to-toe with Russia and lodged protests when they went into Georgia.
And we've done the same thing about Ukraine, but more than launching protests, we've put punishing economic sanctions on Russia that we need to continue.
Oh, that's nonsense.
He was on a TV show a couple months back, and he said, "I'll guarantee you this, Russia's not going into the Ukraine."
And he had to be reminded that they had gone into the Crimea two years before.
You've got to have the ability to do that, and Hillary does.
On the other hand, in Donald Trump, you have somebody who praises Vladimir Putin all the time.
America should really wonder about a President Trump, who had a campaign manager with ties to Putin, pro- Putin elements in the Ukraine, who had to be fired for that reason.
They should wonder -- when Donald Trump is sitting down with Vladimir Putin, is it going to be America's bottom line or is it going to be Donald Trump's bottom line that he's going to be worried about with all of his business dealings?
Now, this could be solved if Donald Trump would be willing to release his tax returns, as he told the American public that he would do.
And I know he's laughing at this, but every president...
But what's it got to do with Russia?
Every president since Richard Nixon has done it, and Donald Trump has said I'm doing business with Russia.
The only way the American public will see whether he has a conflict of interest...
No, he hasn't said that.
He has, actually.
Senator, your time is up
Governor?
Well, thanks.
I'm just trying to keep up with the insult-driven campaign on the other side of the table.
You know, I'm just saying facts about your running mate.
Yeah.
And I know you can't defend.
Senator, please.
This is the governor's two minutes.
I'm happy to defend him, Senator.
Don't put words in my mouth that I'm not defending him.
You're not.
I'm happy to defend him.
Most of what you said is completely false, and the American people know that.
I'll run through the list of things where you won't defend...
This isn't the old days where you can just say stuff and people believe it.
Senator, please.
This is Governor Pence's two minutes.
Look, this is the alternative universe of Washington, D.C., versus reality.
Hillary Clinton said her number-one priority was a reset with Russia.
Donald Trump knew that happened.
He basically was saying it's not going to happen again.
The truth of the matter is that what you have in the rise of aggressive Russia, which has had -- increased its influence in Iran, that's now -- now because of this deal is on a pathway in the future to obtain a nuclear -- the leading state sponsor of terror in the world in Iran now has a closer working relationship with Russia because of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama's foreign policy and $150 billion and sanctions all being lifted.
And then, of course, Syria, I mean, it really is extraordinary that -- Syria is imploding.
You just asked a very thoughtful question about the disaster in Aleppo.
ISIS is headquartered in Raqqa.
It is -- ISIS from Raqqa has overrun vast areas that at great sacrifice the American soldier won in Operation Iraqi Freedom, and yet Senator Kaine still sits here, loyal soldier -- I get all that -- in saying that the foreign policy of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama somehow made the world more secure.
I mean, it really is astonishing that on the day...
We even wiped out the leader of Al Qaida.
... on the day that Iran released four American hostages...
We stopped Iran from getting nuclear weapons.
Governor...
(CROSSTALK)
Governor, yesterday, Mr. Trump said...
And we stopped a nuclear weapons program without a shot.
... quote, "Putin has no respect for Hillary Clinton and no respect for Obama."
Why do you think he'll respect a Trump- Pence administration?
Strength.
Plain and simple.
Business dealings.
Donald Trump -- that's nonsense.
Donald Trump is a strong leader...
Donald Trump's son says that the Trump organization...
... who is going to lead with American strength.
Please, Senator, I'll give you a chance to respond.
We're going to rebuild our military.
And let me -- let me -- this whole Putin thing.
Look, America is stronger than Russia.
Our economy is 16 times larger than the Russian economy.
America's political system is superior to the crony, corrupt capitalist system in Russia in every way.
When Donald Trump and I observe that, as I've said in Syria, in Iran, in Ukraine, that the small and bullying leader of Russia has been stronger on the world stage than this administration, that's stating painful facts.
That's not an endorsement of Vladimir Putin.
That's an indictment of the weak and feckless leadership...
Senator Kaine?
... of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama.
And if -- and I'll just say this, Governor.
If you mistake leadership for dictatorship, and you can't tell the difference, a country that's running its economy into the ground...
Yeah, here we go.
This is the grade school thing again?
... persecuting journalists...
Right, this is grade school.
... if you can't tell the difference, you shouldn't be commander-in-chief.
Yeah.
And with Donald Trump -- Donald Trump's sons say that they have all these business dealings with Russia.
Those could be disclosed with tax returns, but they refuse to do them.
Americans need to worry about whether Donald Trump will be watching out for America's bottom line or his own bottom line.
Senator Kaine, what went wrong with the Russia reset?
Vladimir Putin
Vladimir Putin
And what would do you differently?
Vladimir Putin
He's not a leader.
Anybody who thinks otherwise doesn't know Russian history and they don't know Vladimir Putin.
Hillary Clinton knows exactly who this guy is.
And Hillary kind of has that same feeling.
Right.
So how do deal with him?
You've got to -- we do have to deal with Russia in a lot of different ways.
There are areas where we can cooperate.
So it was Hillary Clinton who worked with Russia on the New START Treaty to reduce their nuclear weapons stockpile.
It was Hillary Clinton that worked with Russia to get them engaged in a community of nations to stop the Iranian nuclear weapons without firing a shot.
She's not going around praising Vladimir Putin as a great guy.
But she knows how to sit down at a table and negotiate tough deals.
This is a very challenging part of the world, and we ought to have a commander-in-chief who is prepared and done it, rather than somebody who goes around praising Vladimir Putin as a great leader.
All right, I'd like to ask now about North Korea, Iran and the threat of nuclear weapons.
North Korea recently conducted its fifth and most powerful nuclear test.
Right.
What specific steps would you take to prevent North Korea from developing a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States?
Governor Pence?
Well, first, we need to -- we need to make a commitment to rebuild our military, including modernizing our nuclear forces.
And we also need -- we also need an effective American diplomacy that will marshal the resources of nations in the Asian Pacific Rim to put pressure on North Korea, on Kim Jong-un, to abandon his nuclear ambitions.
It has to remain the policy of the United States of America the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, plain and simple.
And when Donald Trump is president of the United States, we're -- we're not going to have the -- the kind of posture in the world that has Russia invading Crimea and Ukraine, that has the Chinese building new islands in the South China Sea, that has literally the world, including North Korea, flouting American power.
We're going to -- we're going to go back to the days of peace through strength.
But I have to tell you that -- that all this talk about tax returns -- and I get it, you know, you want to keep bringing that up.
It must have -- must have...
Until he...
(CROSSTALK)
... done well in some focus group.
But here -- Hillary Clinton and her husband set up a private foundation called the Clinton Foundation.
Now, you all need to know out there, this is basic stuff.
Foreign donors, and certainly foreign governments, cannot participate in the American political process.
They cannot make financial contributions.
When you talk about all these -- all these baseless rumors about Russia and the rest, Hillary Clinton -- you asked the trustworthy question at the very beginning -- the reason...
Governor, your two minutes are up.
... the reason the American people don't trust Hillary Clinton is because they are looking at the pay to play politics that she operated with the Clinton Foundation through a private server...
Governor, please.
... while she's secretary of state.
Your two minutes are up, Governor.
And they're saying enough is enough.
Senator Kaine?
I'm going to talk about the foundation, and then I'll talk about North Korea.
So, on the foundation.
I am glad to talk about the foundation.
The Clinton Foundation is one of the highest- rated charities in the world.
It provides AIDS drugs to about 11.5 million people.
It helps Americans deal with opioid overdoses.
It gets higher rankings for its charity than the American Red Cross does.
The Clinton foundation does an awful lot of good work.
Hillary Clinton as secretary of state took no action to benefit the foundation.
The State Department did an investigation, and they concluded that everything Hillary Clinton did as secretary of state was completely in the interest of the United States.
So the foundation does good work.
And Hillary Clinton as secretary of state acted in the interests of the United States.
But let's compare this now with the Trump organization and the Trump Foundation.
The Trump organization is an octopus-like organization with tentacles all over the world whose conflict of interests could only be known if Donald Trump would release his tax returns.
He's refused to do it.
His sons have said that the organization has a lot of business dealings in Russia.
And remember, the Trump organization is not a non-profit.
It's putting money into Donald Trump's pockets and into the pockets of his children, whereas the Clinton Foundation is a non- profit and no Clinton family member draws any salary.
The Trump Foundation is non-profit.
In addition, Donald Trump has a foundation.
This is the difference between a foundation that does good work and a secretary of state who acted in accordance with American interest and somebody who is conflicted and doing work around the world and won't share with the American public what he's doing and what those conflicts are.
Governor, I will give you 30 seconds to respond, because I know you want to, but, again, I would remind you both this was about North Korea.
(LAUGHTER)
Well, Thank you.
Thank you.
A $20,000 portrait of Donald Trump?
Ninety percent.
It has been a platform for the Clintons to travel the world, to have staff.
All right, let's turn back to North Korea...
... that she refused to turn over in her private server...
Senator Kaine
... and we'd have a much better picture of what the Clinton Foundation was about.
If we -- look, a president should take action to defend the United States against imminent threat.
You have to.
A president has to do that.
Now exactly what action, you would have to determine what your intelligence was, how certain you were of that intelligence, but you would have to take action.
You asked the question about how do we deal with a North Korea.
I'm on the Foreign Relations Committee.
We just did an extensive sanctions package against North Korea.
And interestingly enough, Elaine, the U.N. followed and did this -- virtually the same package.
So we're working together with China, and we need to.
China's another one of those relationships where it's competitive, it's also challenging, and in times like North Korea, we have to be able to cooperate.
Hillary understands that very well.
But she's also worked on a lot of diplomatic and important diplomatic deals with China.
And that's what it's going to take.
I'm not sure he could stand up so tough to the people who have loaned him money.
All right.
I'd like to turn to our next segment now.
And in this, I'd like to focus on social issues.
You have both been open about the role that faith has played in your lives.
Can you discuss in detail a time when you struggled to balance your personal faith and a public policy position?
Senator Kaine?
Yeah, that's an easy one for me, Elaine.
It's an easy one.
I'm really fortunate.
I grew up in a wonderful household with great Irish Catholic parents.
My mom and dad are sitting right here.
I was educated by Jesuits at Rockhurst High School in Kansas City.
My 40th reunion is in 10 days.
And I worked with Jesuit missionaries in Honduras, now nearly 35 years ago, and they were the heroes of my life.
I try to practice my religion in a very devout way and follow the teachings of my church in my own personal life.
But I don't believe in this nation, a First Amendment nation, where we don't raise any religion over the other, and we allow people to worship as they please, that the doctrines of any one religion should be mandated for everyone.
For me, the hardest struggle in my faith life was the Catholic Church is against the death penalty and so am I.
But I was governor of a state, and the state law said that there was a death penalty for crimes if the jury determined them to be heinous.
And so I had to grapple with that.
When I was running for governor, I was attacked pretty strongly because of my position on the death penalty.
But I looked the voters of Virginia in the eye and said, look, this is my religion.
I'm not going to change my religious practice to get one vote, but I know how to take an oath and uphold the law.
And if you elect me, I will uphold the law.
And I was elected, and I did.
It was very, very difficult to allow executions to go forward, but in circumstances where I didn't feel like there was a case for clemency, I told Virginia voters I would uphold the law, and I did.
That was a real struggle.
But I think it is really, really important that those of us who have deep faith lives don't feel that we could just substitute our own views for everybody else in society, regardless of their views.
Governor Pence?
Well, it's a wonderful question.
And my Christian faith is at the very heart of who I am.
I was also raised in a wonderful family of faith.
It was a church on Sunday morning and grace before dinner.
But my Christian faith became real for me when I made a personal decision for Christ when I was a freshman in college.
And I've tried to live that out however imperfectly every day of my life since.
And with my wife at my side, we've followed a calling into public service, where we've -- we've tried to -- we've tried to keep faith with the values that we cherish.
And with regard to when I struggle, I appreciate, and -- and -- and -- I have a great deal of respect for Senator Kaine's sincere faith.
I truly do.
That's shared.
But for me, I would tell you that for me the sanctity of life proceeds out of the belief that -- that ancient principle that -- where God says before you were formed in the womb, I knew you, and so for my first time in public life, I sought to stand with great compassion for the sanctity of life.
The state of Indiana has also sought to make sure that we expand alternatives in health care counseling for women, non-abortion alternatives.
I'm also very pleased at the fact we're well on our way in Indiana to becoming the most pro-adoption state in America.
I think if you're going to be pro-life, you should -- you should be pro- adoption.
I mean, to hold to the view -- and I know Senator Kaine, you hold pro-life views personally -- but the very idea that a child that is almost born into the world could still have their life taken from them is just anathema to me.
And I cannot -- I can't conscience about -- about a party that supports that.
Or that -- I know you've historically opposed taxpayer funding of abortion.
But Hillary Clinton wants to -- wants to repeal the longstanding provision in the law where we said we wouldn't use taxpayer dollars to fund abortion.
So for me, my faith informs my life.
I try and spend a little time on my knees every day.
But it all for me begins with cherishing the dignity, the worth, the value of every human life.
Elaine, this is a fundamental question, a fundamental question.
Hillary and I are both people out of religious backgrounds, from Methodist church experience, which was really formative for her as a public servant.
But we really feel like you should live fully and with enthusiasm the commands of your faith.
But it is not the role of the public servant to mandate that for everybody else.
So let's talk about abortion and choice.
Let's talk about them.
We support Roe Wade
We support the constitutional right of American women to consult their own conscience, their own supportive partner, their own minister, but then make their own decision about pregnancy.
That's something we trust American women to do that.
Governor Pence wants to repeal Roe v. Wade.
He said he wants to put it on the ash heap of history.
And we have some young people in the audience who weren't even born when Roe was decided.
This is pretty important.
Before Roe v. Wade, states could pass criminal laws to do just that, to punish women if they made the choice to terminate a pregnancy.
I think you should live your moral values.
But the last thing, the very last thing that government should do is have laws that would punish women who make reproductive choices.
Then why did Donald Trump say that?
We just never would.
Why did he say that?
And so...
Well, I would admit that's not a polished...
(CROSSTALK)
You know, things don't always come out exactly the way he means them.
Well, can I say...
But I'm telling you what the policy of our administration would be.
Great line from the -- great line from the gospel of Matthew.
From the fullness of the heart, the mouth speaks.
Yeah.
When Donald Trump says women should be punished or Mexicans are rapists and criminals...
I'm telling you...
... or John McCain is not a hero, he is showing you who he is.
Senator, you've whipped out that Mexican thing again.
He -- look...
Can you defend it?
There are criminal aliens in this country, Tim, who have come into this country illegally who are perpetrating violence and taking American lives.
You want to -- you want to use a big broad brush against Mexicans on that?
It's a principle that -- Senator Kaine -- and I'm very gentle about this, because I really do respect you -- it's a principle that you embrace.
And I have appreciated the fact that you've supported the Hyde amendment, which bans the use of taxpayer funding for abortion, in the past, but that's not Hillary Clinton's view.
People need to understand, we can come together as a nation.
We can create a culture of life.
More and more young people today are embracing life because we know we are -- we're better for it.
We can -- like Mother Teresa said at that famous national prayer breakfast...
This is important --
... bring the -- let's welcome the children into our world.
There are so many families around the country who can't have children.
We could improve adoption...
But, Governor...
... so that families that can't have children can adopt more readily those children from crisis pregnancies.
Governor, why don't you trust women to make this choice for themselves?
We can encourage people to support life.
Of course we can.
But why don't you trust women?
Why doesn't Donald Trump trust women to make this choice for themselves?
That's what we ought to be doing in public life.
Living our lives of faith or motivation with enthusiasm and excitement, convincing other, dialoguing with each other about important moral issues of the day...
Because there are...
... but on fundamental issues of morality, we should let women make their own decisions.
Because there is -- a society can be judged by how it deals with its most vulnerable, the aged, the infirm, the disabled, and the unborn.
I believe it with all my heart.
I do have one final question for you both tonight.
It has been a divisive campaign.
Senator Kaine, if your ticket wins, what specifically are you going to do to unify the country and reassure the people who voted against you?
That's a really important one.
That may be the $64,000 question, because it has been a divisive campaign.
And again, Hillary is running a campaign about stronger together, and Donald Trump -- and this is -- this is not directed at this man, except to the extent that he can't defend Donald Trump -- Donald Trump has run a campaign that's been about one insult after the next.
But we do have to bring the country together.
So here's what we'll do.
Hillary Clinton was first lady, then senator for eight years and secretary of state.
And I served in the Senate.
She was on the Armed Services Committee.
She was on other committees.
She worked across the aisle after 9/11 to get health benefits for the first responders who bravely went into the towers and into the Pentagon.
She worked to get benefits for -- TRICARE benefits for National Guard members, including Hoosiers and Virginians in the National Guard.
She has a track record of working across the aisle to make things happen.
And, you know, Elaine, I have the same track record.
I was a governor of Virginia with two Republican houses.
And in the Senate, I have good working relationships across the aisle.
Because I think it's fine to be a Democrat or Republican or independent, but after Election Day, the goal is work together.
And Hillary Clinton has a track record of accomplishment across the aisle that will enable her to do just that when we work with the new Congress in January.
Governor, how will you unify the country if you win?
Well, thank you, Elaine, and thanks for a great discussion...
Absolutely.
... tonight.
Thank you, Senator.
This is a very challenging time in the life of our nation.
I think the best way that we can bring people together is through change in Washington, D.C.
You know, I served in Washington, D.C., for 12 years in the Congress of the United States.
And I served with many Republicans and Democrats, men and women of goodwill.
The potential is there to really change the direction of this country, but it's going to take leadership to do it.
The American people want to see our nation standing tall on the world stage again.
They want to see us supporting our military, rebuilding our military, commanding the respect of the world, and they want to see the American economy off to the races again.
They want to see an American comeback.
And Donald Trump's entire career has been about building.
It's been about -- it's going through hardship just like a businessperson does and finding a way through smarts and ingenuity and resilience to fight forward and -- when Donald Trump becomes president of the United States, we're going to have a stronger America.
When you hear him say he wants to make America great again, when we do that, I truly do believe the American people are going to be standing taller.
They're going to see that real change can happen after decades of just talking about it.
And when that happens, the American people are going to stand tall, stand together, and we'll have the kind of unity that's been missing for way too long.
All right, gentlemen, thank you so much.
This concludes the vice presidential debate.
My thanks to the candidates, the commission, and to you for watching.
Please tune in this Sunday for the second presidential debate at Washington University in St. Louis and the final debate on October 19th at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
From Farmville, Virginia, I'm Elaine Quijano of CBS News.
Good night.
Ladies and gentlemen the Republican nominee for president, Donald J. Trump, and the Democratic nominee for president, Hillary Clinton.
(APPLAUSE)
Thank you very much for being here.
We're going to begin with a question from one of the members in our town hall.
Each of you will have two minutes to respond to this question.
Secretary Clinton, you won the coin toss, so you'll go first.
Our first question comes from Patrice Brock.
Patrice?
Thank you, and good evening.
The last debate could have been rated as MA, mature audiences, per TV parental guidelines.
Knowing that educators assign viewing the presidential debates as students' homework, do you feel you're modeling appropriate and positive behavior for today's youth?
Well, thank you.
Are you a teacher?
And I think it is very important for us to make clear to our children that our country really is great because we're good.
And we are going to respect one another, lift each other up.
We are going to be looking for ways to celebrate our diversity, and we are going to try to reach out to every boy and girl, as well as every adult, to bring them in to working on behalf of our country.
I have a very positive and optimistic view about what we can do together.
"That's why the slogan of my campaign is ""Stronger Together,"" because I think if we work together, if we overcome the divisiveness that sometimes sets Americans against one another, and instead we make some big goals -- and I've set forth some big goals, getting the economy to work for everyone, not just those at the top, making sure that we have the best education system from preschool through college and making it affordable, and so much else."
If we set those goals and we go together to try to achieve them, there's nothing in my opinion that America can't do.
So that's why I hope that we will come together in this campaign.
Obviously, I'm hoping to earn your vote, I'm hoping to be elected in November, and I can promise you, I will work with every American.
I want to be the president for all Americans, regardless of your political beliefs, where you come from, what you look like, your religion.
I want us to heal our country and bring it together because that's, I think, the best way for us to get the future that our children and our grandchildren deserve.
Secretary Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.
Well, I actually agree with that.
I agree with everything she said.
I began this campaign because I was so tired of seeing such foolish things happen to our country.
This is a great country.
This is a great land.
I've gotten to know the people of the country over the last year-and-a-half that I've been doing this as a politician.
I cannot believe I'm saying that about myself, but I guess I have been a politician.
And my whole concept was to make America great again.
In other words, trading with other countries.
It's hard to believe.
Inconceivable.
You say who's making these deals?
We're going the make great deals.
We're going to have a strong border.
We're going to bring back law and order.
We have to bring back respect to law enforcement.
At the same time, we have to take care of people on all sides.
We need justice.
But I want to do things that haven't been done, including fixing and making our inner cities better for the African-American citizens that are so great, and for the Latinos, Hispanics, and I look forward to doing it.
It's called make America great again.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
The question from Patrice was about are you both modeling positive and appropriate behavior for today's youth?
We received a lot of questions online, Mr. Trump, about the tape that was released on Friday, as you can imagine.
You called what you said locker room banter.
You described kissing women without consent, grabbing their genitals.
That is sexual assault.
You bragged that you have sexually assaulted women.
Do you understand that?
I don't think you understood what was -- this was locker room talk.
I'm not proud of it.
I apologize to my family.
I apologize to the American people.
Certainly I'm not proud of it.
But this is locker room talk.
You know, when we have a world where you have ISIS chopping off heads, where you have -- and, frankly, drowning people in steel cages, where you have wars and horrible, horrible sights all over, where you have so many bad things happening, this is like medieval times.
We haven't seen anything like this, the carnage all over the world.
And they look and they see.
Can you imagine the people that are, frankly, doing so well against us with ISIS?
And they look at our country and they see what's going on.
Yes, I'm very embarrassed by it.
I hate it.
But it's locker room talk, and it's one of those things.
I will knock the hell out of ISIS.
We're going to defeat ISIS.
And I will tell you, I will take care of ISIS.
So, Mr. Trump...
And we should get on to much more important things and much bigger things.
Just for the record, though, are you saying that what you said on that bus 11 years ago that you did not actually kiss women without consent or grope women without consent?
So, for the record, you're saying you never did that?
I've said things that, frankly, you hear these things I said.
And I was embarrassed by it.
But I have tremendous respect for women.
Have you ever done those things?
And women have respect for me.
And I will tell you that I'm going to make our country safe.
We're going to have borders in our country, which we don't have now.
People are pouring into our country, and they're coming in from the Middle East and other places.
We're going to make America safe again.
We're going to make America great again, but we're going to make America safe again.
And we're going to make America wealthy again, because if you don't do that, it just -- it sounds harsh to say, but we have to build up the wealth of our nation.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
Right now, other nations are taking our jobs and they're taking our wealth.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
And that's what I want to talk about.
Secretary Clinton, do you want to respond?
Well, like everyone else, I've spent a lot of time thinking over the last 48 hours about what we heard and saw.
You know, with prior Republican nominees for president, I disagreed with them on politics, policies, principles, but I never questioned their fitness to serve.
Donald Trump is different.
I said starting back in June that he was not fit to be president and commander-in-chief.
And many Republicans and independents have said the same thing.
And he has said that the video doesn't represent who he is.
But I think it's clear to anyone who heard it that it represents exactly who he is.
Because we've seen this throughout the campaign.
We have seen him insult women.
So, yes, this is who Donald Trump is.
So this is who Donald Trump is.
And the question for us, the question our country must answer is that this is not who we are.
That's why -- to go back to your question -- I want to send a message -- we all should -- to every boy and girl and, indeed, to the entire world that America already is great, but we are great because we are good, and we will respect one another, and we will work with one another, and we will celebrate our diversity.
These are very important values to me, because this is the America that I know and love.
And I can pledge to you tonight that this is the America that I will serve if I'm so fortunate enough to become your president.
And we want to get to some questions from online...
Am I allowed to respond to that?
I assume I am.
Yes, you can respond to that.
It's just words, folks.
It's just words.
Those words, I've been hearing them for many years.
I'm going to help the African-Americans.
I'm going to help the Latinos, Hispanics.
I am going to help the inner cities.
She's done a terrible job for the African-Americans.
She wants their vote, and she does nothing, and then she comes back four years later.
We saw that firsthand when she was United States senator.
She campaigned where the primary part of her campaign...
Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump -- I want to get to audience questions and online questions.
So, she's allowed to do that, but I'm not allowed to respond?
You're going to have -- you're going to get to respond right now.
Sounds fair.
This tape is generating intense interest.
In just 48 hours, it's become the single most talked about story of the entire 2016 election on Facebook, with millions and millions of people discussing it on the social network.
As we said a moment ago, we do want to bring in questions from voters around country via social media, and our first stays on this topic.
"Jeff from Ohio asks on Facebook, ""Trump says the campaign has changed him."
"When did that happen?"""
So, Mr. Trump, let me add to that.
When you walked off that bus at age 59, were you a different man or did that behavior continue until just recently?
And you have two minutes for this.
It was locker room talk, as I told you.
That was locker room talk.
I'm not proud of it.
I am a person who has great respect for people, for my family, for the people of this country.
And certainly, I'm not proud of it.
But that was something that happened.
Four of them here tonight.
Kathy Shelton, that young woman is here with us tonight.
So don't tell me about words.
I am absolutely -- I apologize for those words.
But it is things that people say.
Paula Jones, who's also here tonight.
And I will tell you that when Hillary brings up a point like that and she talks about words that I said 11 years ago, I think it's disgraceful, and I think she should be ashamed of herself, if you want to know the truth.
(APPLAUSE)
Can we please hold the applause?
Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.
Well, first, let me start by saying that so much of what he's just said is not right, but he gets to run his campaign any way he chooses.
He gets to decide what he wants to talk about.
Instead of answering people's questions, talking about our agenda, laying out the plans that we have that we think can make a better life and a better country, that's his choice.
When I hear something like that, I am reminded of what my friend, Michelle Obama, advised us all: When they go low, you go high.
(APPLAUSE)
And, look, if this were just about one video, maybe what he's saying tonight would be understandable, but everyone can draw their own conclusions at this point about whether or not the man in the video or the man on the stage respects women.
So you really owe him an apology.
That was long before I was ever involved, so you actually owe an apology.
Number two, Michelle Obama.
So, you talk about friend?
Go back and take a look at those commercials, a race where you lost fair and square, unlike the Bernie Sanders race, where you won, but not fair and square, in my opinion.
And all you have to do is take a look at WikiLeaks and just see what they say about Bernie Sanders and see what Deborah Wasserman Schultz had in mind, because Bernie Sanders, between super-delegates and Deborah Wasserman Schultz, he never had a chance.
And I was so surprised to see him sign on with the devil.
And I'll tell you what.
I didn't think I'd say this, but I'm going to say it, and I hate to say it.
There has never been anything like it, and we're going to have a special prosecutor.
When I speak, I go out and speak, the people of this country are furious.
In my opinion, the people that have been long-term workers at the FBI are furious.
So we're going to get a special prosecutor, and we're going to look into it, because you know what?
People have been -- their lives have been destroyed for doing one-fifth of what you've done.
And it's a disgrace.
And honestly, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Secretary Clinton, I want to follow up on that.
(CROSSTALK)
I'm going to let you talk about e-mails.
... because everything he just said is absolutely false, but I'm not surprised.
Oh, really?
In the first debate...
(LAUGHTER)
And really, the audience needs to calm down here.
... I told people that it would be impossible to be fact-checking Donald all the time.
I'd never get to talk about anything I want to do and how we're going to really make lives better for people.
So, once again, go to HillaryClinton.com.
We have literally Trump -- you can fact check him in real time.
Last time at the first debate, we had millions of people fact checking, so I expect we'll have millions more fact checking, because, you know, it is -- it's just awfully good that someone with the temperament of Donald Trump is not in charge of the law in our country.
Because you'd be in jail.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton...
We want to remind the audience to please not talk out loud.
Please do not applaud.
You're just wasting time.
And, Secretary Clinton, I do want to follow up on e- mails.
You've said your handing of your e-mails was a mistake.
"You disagreed with FBI Director James Comey, calling your handling of classified information, quote, ""extremely careless."""
The FBI said that there were 110 classified e-mails that were exchanged, eight of which were top secret, and that it was possible hostile actors did gain access to those e-mails.
You don't call that extremely careless?
Well, Martha, first, let me say -- and I've said before, but I'll repeat it, because I want everyone to hear it -- that was a mistake, and I take responsibility for using a personal e-mail account.
Obviously, if I were to do it over again, I would not.
I'm not making any excuses.
It was a mistake.
And I am very sorry about that.
But I think it's also important to point out where there are some misleading accusations from critics and others.
I take classified materials very seriously and always have.
When I was on the Senate Armed Services Committee, I was privy to a lot of classified material.
Obviously, as secretary of state, I had some of the most important secrets that we possess, such as going after bin Laden.
So I am very committed to taking classified information seriously.
And as I said, there is no evidence that any classified information ended up in the wrong hands.
OK, we're going to move on.
And yet she didn't know the word -- the letter C on a document.
Right?
She didn't even know what that word -- what that letter meant.
You know, it's amazing.
I'm watching Hillary go over facts.
And she's going after fact after fact, and she's lying again, because she said she -- you know, what she did with the e-mail was fine.
You think it was fine to delete 33,000 e-mails?
I don't think so.
Well, maybe we'll give three or three or four or five or something.
33,000 e-mails deleted, and now she's saying there wasn't anything wrong.
And more importantly, that was after getting a subpoena.
That wasn't before.
That was after.
She got it from the United States Congress.
And I'll be honest, I am so disappointed in congressmen, including Republicans, for allowing this to happen.
Our Justice Department, where our husband goes on to the back of a airplane for 39 minutes, talks to the attorney general days before a ruling is going to be made on her case.
What you did -- and this is after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
We have to move on.
You did that.
Wait a minute.
One second.
Secretary Clinton, you can respond, and then we got to move on.
We want to give the audience a chance
If you did that in the private sector, you'd be put in jail, let alone after getting a subpoena from the United States Congress.
Secretary Clinton, you can respond.
Then we have to move on to an audience question.
Look, it's just not true.
And so please, go to...
Oh, you didn't delete them?
Allow her to respond, please.
It was personal e-mails, not official.
Oh, 33,000?
Yeah.
Not -- well, we turned over 35,000, so...
Oh, yeah.
What about the other 15,000?
Please allow her to respond.
She didn't talk while you talked.
Yes, that's true, I didn't.
Because you have nothing to say.
I didn't in the first debate, and I'm going to try not to in this debate, because I'd like to get to the questions that the people have brought here tonight to talk to us about.
Get off this question.
OK, Donald.
I know you're into big diversion tonight, anything to avoid talking about your campaign and the way it's exploding and the way Republicans are leaving you.
But let's at least focus...
Let's see what happens...
(CROSSTALK)
Allow her to respond.
... on some of the issues that people care about tonight.
Let's get to their questions.
We have a question here from Ken Karpowicz.
He has a question about health care.
Ken?
I'd like to know, Anderson, why aren't you bringing up the e-mails?
I'd like to know.
Why aren't you bringing...
We brought up the e-mails.
No, it hasn't.
It hasn't.
And it hasn't been finished at all.
Ken Karpowicz has a question.
It's nice to -- one on three.
Thank you.
Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, it is not affordable.
Premiums have gone up.
Deductibles have gone up.
Copays have gone up.
Prescriptions have gone up.
And the coverage has gone down.
What will you do to bring the cost down and make coverage better?
That first one goes to Secretary Clinton, because you started out the last one to the audience
If he wants to start, he can start.
No, go ahead, Donald.
No, I'm a gentlemen, Hillary.
Go ahead.
(LAUGHTER)
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I think Donald was about to say he's going to solve it by repealing it and getting rid of the Affordable Care Act.
And I'm going to fix it, because I agree with you.
Copays, deductibles, prescription drug costs, and I've laid out a series of actions that we can take to try to get those costs down.
But that in and of itself was a good thing.
I meet these people all the time, and they tell me what a difference having that insurance meant to them and their families.
Number one, insurance companies can't deny you coverage because of a pre-existing condition.
Number two, no lifetime limits, which is a big deal if you have serious health problems.
Number three, women can't be charged more than men for our health insurance, which is the way it used to be before the Affordable Care Act.
So I want very much to save what works and is good about the Affordable Care Act.
But we've got to get costs down.
We've got to provide additional help to small businesses so that they can afford to provide health insurance.
And then we would have to start all over again.
Secretary Clinton, your time is up.
So I want us to get to 100 percent, but get costs down and keep quality up.
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.
It is such a great question and it's maybe the question I get almost more than anything else, outside of defense.
You know it.
We all know it.
It's going up at numbers that nobody's ever seen worldwide.
Nobody's ever seen numbers like this for health care.
It's only getting worse.
In '17, it implodes by itself.
Their method of fixing it is to go back and ask Congress for more money, more and more money.
We have right now almost $20 trillion in debt.
Obamacare will never work.
It's very bad, very bad health insurance.
Far too expensive.
We have to repeal it and replace it with something absolutely much less expensive and something that works, where your plan can actually be tailored.
We want competition.
You will have the finest health care plan there is.
It's catastrophic in certain ways.
Hillary Clinton has been after this for years.
Obamacare was the first step.
Obamacare is a total disaster.
Mr. Trump, your time...
It is a disastrous plan, and it has to be repealed and replaced.
Secretary Clinton, let me follow up with you.
"Your husband called Obamacare, quote, ""the craziest thing in the world,"" saying that small-business owners are getting killed as premiums double, coverage is cut in half."
Was he mistaken or was the mistake simply telling the truth?
No, I mean, he clarified what he meant.
And it's very clear.
Look, we are in a situation in our country where if we were to start all over again, we might come up with a different system.
But we have an employer-based system.
That's where the vast majority of people get their health care.
And the Affordable Care Act was meant to try to fill the gap between people who were too poor and couldn't put together any resources to afford health care, namely people on Medicaid.
Obviously, Medicare, which is a single-payer system, which takes care of our elderly and does a great job doing it, by the way, and then all of the people who were employed, but people who were working but didn't have the money to afford insurance and didn't have anybody, an employer or anybody else, to help them.
That was the slot that the Obamacare approach was to take.
So if we just rip it up and throw it away, what Donald's not telling you is we just turn it back to the insurance companies the way it used to be, and that means the insurance companies...
Secretary Clinton...
... get to do pretty much whatever they want, including saying, look, I'm sorry, you've got diabetes, you had cancer, your child has asthma...
Your time is up.
... you may not be able to have insurance because you can't afford it.
So let's fix what's broken about it, but let's not throw it away and give it all back to the insurance companies and the drug companies.
That's not going to work.
Mr. Trump, let me follow up on this.
Well, I just want -- just one thing.
First of all, Hillary, everything's broken about it.
Everything.
This is a perfect example of it, trying to save Obamacare, which is a disaster.
You've said you want to end Obamacare...
By the way...
You've said you want to end Obamacare.
You've also said you want to make coverage accessible for people with pre-existing conditions.
How do you force insurance companies to do that if you're no longer mandating that every American get insurance?
We're going to be able to.
You're going to have plans...
What does that mean?
Well, I'll tell you what it means.
You're going to have plans that are so good, because we're going to have so much competition in the insurance industry.
Once we break out -- once we break out the lines and allow the competition to come...
Are you going -- are you going to have a mandate that Americans have to have health insurance?
President Obama -- Anderson, excuse me.
President Obama, by keeping those lines, the boundary lines around each state, it was almost gone until just very toward the end of the passage of Obamacare, which, by the way, was a fraud.
And Republicans feel this way, believe it or not, and strongly this way.
We're going to block grant into the states.
We're going to block grant into Medicaid into the states...
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
... so that we will be able to take care of people without the necessary funds to take care of themselves.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
We now go to Gorbah Hamed with a question for both candidates.
Hi.
There are 3.3 million Muslims in the United States, and I'm one of them.
You've mentioned working with Muslim nations, but with Islamophobia on the rise, how will you help people like me deal with the consequences of being labeled as a threat to the country after the election is over?
Mr. Trump, you're first.
Well, you're right about Islamophobia, and that's a shame.
But one thing we have to do is we have to make sure that -- because there is a problem.
I mean, whether we like it or not, and we could be very politically correct, but whether we like it or not, there is a problem.
When they see hatred going on, they have to report it.
Horribly wounded.
They'll never be the same.
And, you know, there's always a reason for everything.
If they don't do that, it's a very difficult situation for our country, because you look at Orlando and you look at San Bernardino and you look at the World Trade Center.
Go outside.
Look at Paris.
Now, to solve a problem, you have to be able to state what the problem is or at least say the name.
But the name is there.
It's radical Islamic terror.
And before you solve it, you have to say the name.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, thank you for asking your question.
And I've heard this question from a lot of Muslim-Americans across our country, because, unfortunately, there's been a lot of very divisive, dark things said about Muslims.
And even someone like Captain Khan, the young man who sacrificed himself defending our country in the United States Army, has been subject to attack by Donald.
I want to say just a couple of things.
And we've had many successful Muslims.
We just lost a particular well-known one with Muhammad Ali.
My vision of America is an America where everyone has a place, if you're willing to work hard, you do your part, you contribute to the community.
That's what America is.
That's what we want America to be for our children and our grandchildren.
It's also very short-sighted and even dangerous to be engaging in the kind of demagogic rhetoric that Donald has about Muslims.
We need American Muslims to be part of our eyes and ears on our front lines.
I've worked with a lot of different Muslim groups around America.
I've met with a lot of them, and I've heard how important it is for them to feel that they are wanted and included and part of our country, part of our homeland security, and that's what I want to see.
It's also important I intend to defeat ISIS, to do so in a coalition with majority Muslim nations.
Right now, a lot of those nations are hearing what Donald says and wondering, why should we cooperate with the Americans?
And this is a gift to ISIS and the terrorists, violent jihadist terrorists.
We are not at war with Islam.
And it is a mistake and it plays into the hands of the terrorists to act as though we are.
So I want a country where citizens like you and your family are just as welcome as anyone else.
Thank you, Secretary Clinton.
Mr. Trump, in December, you said this.
Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country's representatives can figure out what the hell is going on.
We have no choice.
We have no choice.
Your running mate said this week that the Muslim ban is no longer your position.
Is that correct?
And if it is, was it a mistake to have a religious test?
Iraq was disaster.
So he would have been alive today.
The Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into a extreme vetting from certain areas of the world.
Hillary Clinton wants to allow hundreds of thousands -- excuse me.
Excuse me..
And why did it morph into that?
No, did you answer the question?
Do you still believe...
Why don't you interrupt her?
You interrupt me all the time.
I do.
Why don't you interrupt her?
Would you please explain whether or not the Muslim ban still stands?
It's called extreme vetting.
We are going to areas like Syria where they're coming in by the tens of thousands because of Barack Obama.
This is going to be the great Trojan horse of all time.
We have enough problems in this country.
I believe in building safe zones.
I believe in having other people pay for them, as an example, the Gulf states, who are not carrying their weight, but they have nothing but money, and take care of people.
And, Secretary Clinton, let me ask you about that, because you have asked for an increase from 10,000 to 65,000 Syrian refugees.
We know you want tougher vetting.
That's not a perfect system.
So why take the risk of having those refugees come into the country?
Well, first of all, I will not let anyone into our country that I think poses a risk to us.
But there are a lot of refugees, women and children -- think of that picture we all saw of that 4-year-old boy with the blood on his forehead because he'd been bombed by the Russian and Syrian air forces.
There are children suffering in this catastrophic war, largely, I believe, because of Russian aggression.
And we need to do our part.
We by no means are carrying anywhere near the load that Europe and others are.
But we will have vetting that is as tough as it needs to be from our professionals, our intelligence experts and others.
How do you do that?
We are a country founded on religious freedom and liberty.
How do we do what he has advocated without causing great distress within our own county?
Are we going to have religious tests when people fly into our country?
And how do we expect to be able to implement those?
So I thought that what he said was extremely unwise and even dangerous.
It's been debunked, but it never stops him from saying whatever he wants to say.
So, please...
... go to HillaryClinton.com and you can see it.
And you voted for it.
And you shouldn't have.
Well, I just want to say...
There's been lots of fact-checking on that.
I'd like to move on to an online question
Excuse me.
She just went about 25 seconds over her time.
She did not.
Could I just respond to this, please?
Very quickly, please.
Hillary Clinton, in terms of having people come into our country, we have many criminal illegal aliens.
When we want to send them back to their country, their country says we don't want them.
In some cases, they're murderers, drug lords, drug problems.
Let me tell you, I'm going to force them right back into their country.
They're murderers and some very bad people.
And I will tell you very strongly, when Bernie Sanders said she had bad judgment, she has really bad judgment, because we are letting people into this country that are going to cause problems and crime like you've never seen.
And it shouldn't be allowed to happen.
They've never endorsed a presidential candidate.
The Border Patrol agents, 16,500, just recently endorsed me, and they endorsed me because I understand the border.
She doesn't.
Come right in.
Come right over.
It's a horrible thing she's doing.
She's got bad judgment, and honestly, so bad that she should never be president of the United States.
That I can tell you.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
I want to move on.
This next question from the public through the Bipartisan Open Debate Coalition's online forum, where Americans submitted questions that generated millions of votes.
This question involves WikiLeaks release of purported excerpts of Secretary Clinton's paid speeches, which she has refused to release, and one line in particular, in which you, Secretary Clinton, purportedly say you need both a public and private position on certain issues.
So, Tu (ph), from Virginia asks, is it OK for politicians to be two-faced?
Is it acceptable for a politician to have a private stance on issues?
Secretary Clinton, your two minutes.
Well, right.
It was principled, and it was strategic.
And I was making the point that it is hard sometimes to get the Congress to do what you want to do and you have to keep working at it.
And, yes, President Lincoln was trying to convince some people, he used some arguments, convincing other people, he used other arguments.
That was a great -- I thought a great display of presidential leadership.
And WikiLeaks is part of that, as are other sites where the Russians hack information, we don't even know if it's accurate information, and then they put it out.
We have never in the history of our country been in a situation where an adversary, a foreign power, is working so hard to influence the outcome of the election.
And believe me, they're not doing it to get me elected.
Now, maybe because he has praised Putin, maybe because he says he agrees with a lot of what Putin wants to do, maybe because he wants to do business in Moscow, I don't know the reasons.
But we deserve answers.
And we should demand that Donald release all of his tax returns so that people can see what are the entanglements and the financial relationships that he has...
We're going to get to that later.
Secretary Clinton, you're out of time.
... with the Russians and other foreign powers.
Mr. Trump?
Well, I think I should respond, because -- so ridiculous.
Look, now she's blaming -- she got caught in a total lie.
Her papers went out to all her friends at the banks, Goldman Sachs and everybody else, and she said things -- WikiLeaks that just came out.
That's one that I haven't...
(LAUGHTER)
OK, Honest Abe, Honest Abe never lied.
That's the good thing.
That's the big difference between Abraham Lincoln and you.
That's a big, big difference.
We're talking about some difference.
I think it would be great if we got along with Russia because we could fight ISIS together, as an example.
But they always blame Russia.
And the reason they blame Russia because they think they're trying to tarnish me with Russia.
I know -- I know about Russia, but I know nothing about the inner workings of Russia.
I don't deal there.
I have a very, very great balance sheet, so great that when I did the Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue, the United States government, because of my balance sheet, which they actually know very well, chose me to do the Old Post Office, between the White House and Congress, chose me to do the Old Post Office.
One of the primary area things, in fact, perhaps the primary thing was balance sheet.
But I have no loans with Russia.
You could go to the United States government, and they would probably tell you that, because they know my sheet very well in order to get that development I had to have.
Now, the taxes are a very simple thing.
Many of her friends took bigger deductions.
Warren Buffett took a massive deduction.
But -- but as soon as my routine audit is finished, I'll release my returns.
I'll be very proud to.
They're actually quite great.
Thank you, Mr. Trump.
We want to turn, actually, to the topic of taxes.
We have a question from Spencer Maass.
Spencer?
Good evening.
My question is, what specific tax provisions will you change to ensure the wealthiest Americans pay their fair share in taxes?
Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.
Well, one thing I'd do is get rid of carried interest.
One of the greatest provisions for people like me, to be honest with you, I give up a lot when I run, because I knock out the tax code.
And she could have done this years ago, by the way.
She's a United States -- she was a United States senator.
She complains that Donald Trump took advantage of the tax code.
Well, why didn't she change it?
Why didn't you change it when you were a senator?
The reason you didn't is that all your friends take the same advantage that I do.
And I do.
You have provisions in the tax code that, frankly, we could change.
But you wouldn't change it, because all of these people gave you the money so you can take negative ads on Donald Trump.
But -- and I say that about a lot of things.
You know, I've heard Hillary complaining about so many different things over the years.
I wish you would have done this.
But she's been there for 30 years she's been doing this stuff.
She never changed.
And she never will change.
She never will change.
We're getting rid of carried interest provisions.
I'm lowering taxes actually, because I think it's so important for corporations, because we have corporations leaving -- massive corporations and little ones, little ones can't form.
We're getting rid of regulations which goes hand in hand with the lowering of the taxes.
You can look at me.
And what that's going to do is a disaster for the country.
But she is raising your taxes and I'm lowering your taxes.
We are going to be thriving again.
If China has a GDP of 7 percent, it's like a national catastrophe.
And that's, like, no growth.
And we're going lower, in my opinion.
And I'm bringing them down to one of the lower in the world.
And I think it's so important -- one of the most important things we can do.
Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.
The question was, what specific tax provisions will you change to ensure the wealthiest Americans pay their fair share of taxes?
Well, everything you've heard just now from Donald is not true.
I'm sorry I have to keep saying this, but he lives in an alternative reality.
But I'll tell you what he's going to do.
Donald always takes care of Donald and people like Donald, and this would be a massive gift.
Now, here's what I want to do.
I have said nobody who makes less than $250,000 a year -- and that's the vast majority of Americans as you know -- will have their taxes raised, because I think we've got to go where the money is.
And the money is with people who have taken advantage of every single break in the tax code.
I voted to close, I think, one of the loopholes he took advantage of when he claimed a billion-dollar loss that enabled him to avoid paying taxes.
I want to have a tax on people who are making a million dollars.
It's called the Buffett rule.
Yes, Warren Buffett is the one who's gone out and said somebody like him should not be paying a lower tax rate than his secretary.
I want to have a surcharge on incomes above $5 million.
We have to make up for lost times, because I want to invest in you.
I want to invest in hard-working families.
And we need to reverse that.
People like Donald, who paid zero in taxes, zero for our vets, zero for our military, zero for health and education, that is wrong.
Thank you, Secretary.
And we're going to make sure that nobody, no corporation, and no individual can get away without paying his fair share to support our country.
Thank you.
I want to give you -- Mr. Trump, I want to give you the chance to respond.
I just wanted to tell our viewers what she's referring to.
In the last month, taxes were the number-one issue on Facebook for the first time in the campaign.
The New York Times published three pages of your 1995 tax returns.
They show you claimed a $916 million loss, which means you could have avoided paying personal federal income taxes for years.
You've said you pay state taxes, employee taxes, real estate taxes, property taxes.
You have not answered, though, a simple question.
Did you use that $916 million loss to avoid paying personal federal income taxes for years?
Of course I do.
Of course I do.
And so do all of her donors, or most of her donors.
I know many of her donors.
Her donors took massive tax write-offs.
So have you (inaudible) personal federal income tax?
A lot of my -- excuse me, Anderson -- a lot of my write- off was depreciation and other things that Hillary as a senator allowed.
And she'll always allow it, because the people that give her all this money, they want it.
That's why.
Very interesting why she's leaving carried interest.
I absolutely used it.
And so did Warren Buffett and so did George Soros and so did many of the other people that Hillary is getting money from.
Now, I won't mention their names, because they're rich, but they're not famous.
So we won't make them famous.
So can you -- can you say how many years you have avoided paying personal federal income taxes?
No, but I pay tax, and I pay federal tax, too.
But I have a write-off, a lot of it's depreciation, which is a wonderful charge.
I love depreciation.
You know, she's given it to us.
Hey, if she had a problem -- for 30 years she's been doing this, Anderson.
I say it all the time.
She talks about health care.
Why didn't she do something about it?
She talks about taxes.
Why didn't she do something about it?
She doesn't do anything about anything other than talk.
With her, it's all talk and no action.
In the past...
And, again, Bernie Sanders, it's really bad judgment.
She has made bad judgment not only on taxes.
They started from that little area, and now they're in 32 different nations, Hillary.
Congratulations.
Great job.
Secretary -- I want you to be able to respond, Secretary Clinton.
Well, here we go again.
I've been in favor of getting rid of carried interest for years, starting when I was a senator from New York.
But that's not the point here.
Why didn't you do it?
Why didn't you do it?
Allow her to respond.
Because I was a senator with a Republican president.
Oh, really?
I will be the president and we will get it done.
That's exactly right.
You could have done it, if you were an effective -- if you were an effective senator, you could have done it.
If you were an effective senator, you could have done it.
But you were not an effective senator.
Please allow her to respond.
She didn't interrupt you.
You know, under our Constitution, presidents have something called veto power.
"Look, he has now said repeatedly, ""30 years this and 30 years that."""
So let me talk about my 30 years in public service.
I'm very glad to do so.
Hundreds of thousands of kids now have a chance to be adopted because I worked to change our adoption and foster care system.
Hundreds of thousands of National Guard and Reserve members have health care because of work that I did, and children have safer medicines because I was able to pass a law that required the dosing to be more carefully done.
Four hundred pieces of legislation have my name on it as a sponsor or cosponsor when I was a senator for eight years.
I worked very hard and was very proud to be re-elected in New York by an even bigger margin than I had been elected the first time.
And as president, I will take that work, that bipartisan work, that finding common ground, because you have to be able to get along with people to get things done in Washington.
Thank you, secretary.
I've proven that I can, and for 30 years, I've produced results for people.
Thank you, secretary.
We're going to move on to Syria.
Both of you have mentioned that.
She said a lot of things that were false.
I mean, I think we should be allowed to maybe...
No, we can -- no, Mr. Trump, we're going to go on.
This is about the audience.
Excuse me.
Because she has been a disaster as a senator.
A disaster.
Mr. Trump, we're going to move on.
The heart-breaking video of a 5-year-old Syrian boy named Omran sitting in an ambulance after being pulled from the rubble after an air strike in Aleppo focused the world's attention on the horrors of the war in Syria, with 136 million views on Facebook alone.
But there are much worse images coming out of Aleppo every day now, where in the past few weeks alone, 400 people have been killed, at least 100 of them children.
Just days ago, the State Department called for a war crimes investigation of the Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad and its ally, Russia, for their bombardment of Aleppo.
So this next question comes through social media through Facebook.
Diane from Pennsylvania asks, if you were president, what would you do about Syria and the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo?
Isn't it a lot like the Holocaust when the U.S. waited too long before we helped?
Secretary Clinton, we will begin with your two minutes.
Well, the situation in Syria is catastrophic.
And every day that goes by, we see the results of the regime by Assad in partnership with the Iranians on the ground, the Russians in the air, bombarding places, in particular Aleppo, where there are hundreds of thousands of people, probably about 250,000 still left.
And there is a determined effort by the Russian air force to destroy Aleppo in order to eliminate the last of the Syrian rebels who are really holding out against the Assad regime.
Russia hasn't paid any attention to ISIS.
They're interested in keeping Assad in power.
So I, when I was secretary of state, advocated and I advocate today a no-fly zone and safe zones.
We need some leverage with the Russians, because they are not going to come to the negotiating table for a diplomatic resolution, unless there is some leverage over them.
And we have to work more closely with our partners and allies on the ground.
But I want to emphasize that what is at stake here is the ambitions and the aggressiveness of Russia.
Russia has decided that it's all in, in Syria.
And they've also decided who they want to see become president of the United States, too, and it's not me.
I've stood up to Russia.
I've taken on Putin and others, and I would do that as president.
I think wherever we can cooperate with Russia, that's fine.
And I did as secretary of state.
It's how we got the sanctions on Iran that put a lid on the Iranian nuclear program without firing a single shot.
So I would go to the negotiating table with more leverage than we have now.
But I do support the effort to investigate for crimes, war crimes committed by the Syrians and the Russians and try to hold them accountable.
Thank you, Secretary Clinton.
Mr. Trump?
I hate to interrupt you, but at some point...
OK.
But you were in contact -- excuse me.
You were...
At some point, we need to do some fact-checking here.
You were in total contact with the White House, and perhaps, sadly, Obama probably still listened to you.
I don't think he would be listening to you very much anymore.
Obama draws the line in the sand.
It was laughed at all over the world what happened.
Now, with that being said, she talks tough against Russia.
But our nuclear program has fallen way behind, and they've gone wild with their nuclear program.
Not good.
Our government shouldn't have allowed that to happen.
Russia is new in terms of nuclear.
We are old.
We're tired.
We're exhausted in terms of nuclear.
A very bad thing.
Now, she talks tough, she talks really tough against Putin and against Assad.
She talks in favor of the rebels.
She doesn't even know who the rebels are.
You know, every time we take rebels, whether it's in Iraq or anywhere else, we're arming people.
And you know what happens?
They end up being worse than the people.
Gadhafi's out.
It's a mess.
I'm sure you probably have heard that.
It was a disaster.
Because the fact is, almost everything she's done in foreign policy has been a mistake and it's been a disaster.
But if you look at Russia, just take a look at Russia, and look at what they did this week, where I agree, she wasn't there, but possibly she's consulted.
Everyone's all excited.
Well, what Russia did with Assad and, by the way, with Iran, who you made very powerful with the dumbest deal perhaps I've ever seen in the history of deal-making, the Iran deal, with the $150 billion, with the $1.7 billion in cash, which is enough to fill up this room.
But look at that deal.
Iran now and Russia are now against us.
So she wants to fight.
She wants to fight for rebels.
There's only one problem.
You don't even know who the rebels are.
So what's the purpose?
Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump, your two minutes is up.
And one thing I have to say.
Your two minutes is up.
Mr. Trump, let me repeat the question.
If you were president...
(LAUGHTER)
... what would you do about Syria and the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo?
And I want to remind you what your running mate said.
He said provocations by Russia need to be met with American strength and that if Russia continues to be involved in air strikes along with the Syrian government forces of Assad, the United States of America should be prepared to use military force to strike the military targets of the Assad regime.
OK.
He and I haven't spoken, and I disagree.
I disagree.
You disagree with your running mate?
I think you have to knock out ISIS.
Right now, Syria is fighting ISIS.
We have people that want to fight both at the same time.
Syria Syria
Syria is Russia and it's Iran, who she made strong and Kerry and Obama made into a very powerful nation and a very rich nation, very, very quickly, very, very quickly.
I believe we have to get ISIS.
We have to worry about ISIS before we can get too much more involved.
She had a chance to do something with Syria.
They had a chance.
And that was the line.
And she didn't.
What do you think will happen if Aleppo falls?
I think Aleppo is a disaster, humanitarian-wise.
What do you think will happen if it falls?
OK?
It basically has fallen.
Let me tell you something.
You take a look at Mosul.
The biggest problem I have with the stupidity of our foreign policy, we have Mosul.
They think a lot of the ISIS leaders are in Mosul.
So we have announcements coming out of Washington and coming out of Iraq, we will be attacking Mosul in three weeks or four weeks.
Well, all of these bad leaders from ISIS are leaving Mosul.
Why can't they do it quietly?
Why can't they do the attack, make it a sneak attack, and after the attack is made, inform the American public that we've knocked out the leaders, we've had a tremendous success?
People leave.
Why do they have to say we're going to be attacking Mosul within the next four to six weeks, which is what they're saying?
How stupid is our country?
There are sometimes reasons the military does that.
Psychological warfare.
I can't think of any.
I can't think of any.
And I'm pretty good at it.
It might be to help get civilians out.
And we have General Flynn.
And we have -- look, I have 200 generals and admirals who endorsed me.
I have 21 Congressional Medal of Honor recipients who endorsed me.
We talk about it all the time.
They understand, why can't they do something secretively, where they go in and they knock out the leadership?
How -- why would these people stay there?
I've been reading now...
Tell me what your strategy is.
Why would they be saying -- they're not staying there anymore.
They're gone.
Because everybody's talking about how Iraq, which is us with our leadership, goes in to fight Mosul.
Now, with these 200 admirals and generals, they can't believe it.
All I say is this.
General George Patton, General Douglas MacArthur are spinning in their grave at the stupidity of what we're doing in the Middle East.
I'm going to go to Secretary Clinton.
Secretary Clinton, you want Assad to go.
You advocated arming rebels, but it looks like that may be too late for Aleppo.
You talk about diplomatic efforts.
Those have failed.
Cease-fires have failed.
Would you introduce the threat of U.S. military force beyond a no-fly zone against the Assad regime to back up diplomacy?
I would not use American ground forces in Syria.
I think that would be a very serious mistake.
I don't think American troops should be holding territory, which is what they would have to do as an occupying force.
I don't think that is a smart strategy.
I do think the use of special forces, which we're using, the use of enablers and trainers in Iraq, which has had some positive effects, are very much in our interests, and so I do support what is happening, but let me just...
But what would you do differently than President Obama is doing?
Well, Martha, I hope that by the time I -- if I'm fortunate...
Everything.
I hope by the time I am president that we will have pushed ISIS out of Iraq.
I do think that there is a good chance that we can take Mosul.
And, you know, Donald says he knows more about ISIS than the generals.
No, he doesn't.
There are a lot of very important planning going on, and some of it is to signal to the Sunnis in the area, as well as Kurdish Peshmerga fighters, that we all need to be in this.
And that takes a lot of planning and preparation.
I would go after Baghdadi.
I would specifically target Baghdadi, because I think our targeting of Al Qaida leaders -- and I was involved in a lot of those operations, highly classified ones -- made a difference.
So I think that could help.
I would also consider arming the Kurds.
The Kurds have been our best partners in Syria, as well as Iraq.
And I know there's a lot of concern about that in some circles, but I think they should have the equipment they need so that Kurdish and Arab fighters on the ground are the principal way that we take Raqqa after pushing ISIS out of Iraq.
Thank you very much.
We're going to move on...
You know what's funny?
She went over a minute over, and you don't stop her.
When I go one second over, it's like a big deal.
You had many answers.
It's really -- it's really very interesting.
We've got a question over here from James Carter.
Mr. Carter?
My question is, do you believe you can be a devoted president to all the people in the United States?
That question begins for Mr. Trump.
Absolutely.
I will be a president for all of our people.
And I'll be a president that will turn our inner cities around and will give strength to people and will give economics to people and will bring jobs back.
Not in this country.
It is a disaster.
And now she wants to sign TPP, even though she says now she's for it.
They actually said that she lied.
OK?
And she lied.
But she's lied about a lot of things.
I would be a president for all of the people, African- Americans, the inner cities.
Devastating what's happening to our inner cities.
She's been talking about it for years.
As usual, she talks about it, nothing happens.
She doesn't get it done.
Same with the Latino Americans, the Hispanic Americans.
The same exact thing.
They talk, they don't get it done.
You go into the inner cities and -- you see it's 45 percent poverty.
African- Americans now 45 percent poverty in the inner cities.
The education is a disaster.
Jobs are essentially nonexistent.
I mean, it's -- you know, and I've been saying at big speeches where I have 20,000 and 30,000 people, what do you have to lose?
It can't get any worse.
And she's been talking about the inner cities for 25 years.
Nothing's going to ever happen.
Let me tell you, if she's president of the United States, nothing's going to happen.
It's just going to be talk
And all of her friends, the taxes we were talking about, and I would just get it by osmosis.
She's not doing any me favors.
But by doing all the others' favors, she's doing me favors.
Mr. Trump, thank you.
But I will tell you, she's all talk.
It doesn't get done.
All you have to do is take a look at her Senate run.
Take a look at upstate New York.
Your two minutes is up.
Secretary Clinton, two minutes?
It turned out to be a disaster.
You have two minutes, Secretary Clinton.
Well, 67 percent of the people voted to re-elect me when I ran for my second term, and I was very proud and very humbled by that.
Mr. Carter, I have tried my entire life to do what I can to support children and families.
You know, right out of law school, I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund.
And Donald talks a lot about, you know, the 30 years I've been in public service.
I'm proud of that.
You know, I started off as a young lawyer working against discrimination against African-American children in schools and in the criminal justice system.
I worked to make sure that kids with disabilities could get a public education, something that I care very much about.
I have worked with Latinos -- one of my first jobs in politics was down in south Texas registering Latino citizens to be able to vote.
So I have a deep devotion, to use your absolutely correct word, to making sure that an every American feels like he or she has a place in our country.
And I think when you look at the letters that I get, a lot of people are worried that maybe they wouldn't have a place in Donald Trump's America.
They write me, and one woman wrote me about her son, Felix.
She adopted him from Ethiopia when he was a toddler.
He's 10 years old now.
This is the only one country he's ever known.
And he listens to Donald on TV and he said to his mother one day, will he send me back to Ethiopia if he gets elected?
You know, children listen to what is being said.
To go back to the very, very first question.
A lot of people are feeling, you know, uneasy.
A lot of kids are expressing their concerns.
So, first and foremost, I will do everything I can to reach out to everybody.
Your time, Secretary Clinton.
Democrats, Republicans, independents, people across our country.
If you don't vote for me, I still want to be your president.
Your two minutes is up.
I want to be the best president I can be for every American.
Secretary Clinton, your two minutes is up.
I want to follow up on something that Donald Trump actually said to you, a comment you made last month.
"You said that half of Donald Trump's supporters are, quote, ""deplorables, racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic."""
You later said you regretted saying half.
"You didn't express regret for using the term ""deplorables."""
To Mr. Carter's question, how can you unite a country if you've written off tens of millions of Americans?
It's with him and with the hateful and divisive campaign that he has run, and the inciting of violence at his rallies, and the very brutal kinds of comments about not just women, but all Americans, all kinds of Americans.
And what he has said about African-Americans and Latinos, about Muslims, about POWs, about immigrants, about people with disabilities, he's never apologized for.
And so I do think that a lot of the tone and tenor that he has said -- I'm proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran.
We ran a campaign based on issues, not insults.
And he is supporting me 100 percent.
Thank you.
Because we talked about what we wanted to do.
We might have had some differences, and we had a lot of debates...
Thank you, Secretary.
... but we believed that we could make the country better.
And I was proud of that.
I want to give you a minute to respond.
We have a divided nation.
We have a very divided nation.
You look at Charlotte.
You look at Baltimore.
You look at the violence that's taking place in the inner cities, Chicago, you take a look at Washington, D.C.
We have a divided nation, because people like her -- and believe me, she has tremendous hate in her heart.
And when she said deplorables, she meant it.
And when she said irredeemable, they're irredeemable, you didn't mention that, but when she said they're irredeemable, to me that might have been even worse.
She said some of them are irredeemable.
She's got tremendous -- she's got tremendous hatred.
And this country cannot take another four years of Barack Obama, and that's what you're getting with her.
Mr. Trump, let me follow up with you.
In 2008, you wrote in one of your books that the most important characteristic of a good leader is discipline.
"You said, if a leader doesn't have it, quote, ""he or she won't be one for very long."""
Is that the discipline of a good leader?
It was just take a look at the person that she built up to be this wonderful Girl Scout who was no Girl Scout.
You mentioned sex tape.
By the way, just so you understand, when she said 3 o'clock in the morning, take a look at Benghazi.
The question is, is that the discipline of a good leader?
... 600 -- wait a minute, Anderson, 600 times.
Well, she said she was awake at 3 o'clock in the morning, and she also sent a tweet out at 3 o'clock in the morning, but I won't even mention that.
But she said she'll be awake.
Who's going -- the famous thing, we're going to answer our call at 3 o'clock in the morning.
Guess what happened?
And the only one she talked to was Sidney Blumenthal, who's her friend and not a good guy, by the way.
So, you know, she shouldn't be talking about that.
Now, tweeting happens to be a modern day form of communication.
I mean, you can like it or not like it.
I have, between Facebook and Twitter, I have almost 25 million people.
It's a very effective way of communication.
So you can put it down, but it is a very effective form of communication.
I'm not un-proud of it, to be honest with you.
Secretary Clinton, does Mr. Trump have the discipline to be a good leader?
No.
I'm shocked to hear that.
(LAUGHTER)
Well, it's not only my opinion.
It's the opinion of many others, national security experts, Republicans, former Republican members of Congress.
But it's in part because those of us who have had the great privilege of seeing this job up close and know how difficult it is, and it's not just because I watched my husband take a $300 billion deficit and turn it into a $200 billion surplus, and 23 million new jobs were created, and incomes went up for everybody.
Everybody.
And it's not just because I worked with George W. Bush after 9/11, and I was very proud that when I told him what the city needed, what we needed to recover, he said you've got it, and he never wavered.
He stuck with me.
And I have worked and I admire President Obama.
He inherited the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
That was a terrible time for our country.
We have to move along.
Nine million people lost their jobs.
Secretary Clinton, we have to...
Five million homes were lost.
Secretary Clinton, we're moving.
And $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out.
We are back on the right track.
He would send us back into recession with his tax plans that benefit the wealthiest of Americans.
Secretary Clinton, we are moving to an audience question.
We're almost out of time.
We have another...
We're moving to an audience question.
It is -- our country has the slowest growth and jobs are a disaster.
Mr. Trump, Secretary Clinton, we want to get to the audience.
Thank you very much both of you.
(LAUGHTER)
We have another audience question.
Beth Miller has a question for both candidates.
Good evening.
Perhaps the most important aspect of this election is the Supreme Court justice.
What would you prioritize as the most important aspect of selecting a Supreme Court justice?
We begin with your two minutes, Secretary Clinton.
Thank you.
Well, you're right.
This is one of the most important issues in this election.
I want to appoint Supreme Court justices who understand the way the world really works, who have real-life experience, who have not just been in a big law firm and maybe clerked for a judge and then gotten on the bench, but, you know, maybe they tried some more cases, they actually understand what people are up against.
Because I think the current court has gone in the wrong direction.
And so I would want to see the Supreme Court reverse Citizens United and get dark, unaccountable money out of our politics.
Donald doesn't agree with that.
I would like the Supreme Court to understand that voting rights are still a big problem in many parts of our country, that we don't always do everything we can to make it possible for people of color and older people and young people to be able to exercise their franchise.
I want a Supreme Court that will stick with Roe v. Wade and a woman's right to choose, and I want a Supreme Court that will stick with marriage equality.
Now, Donald has put forth the names of some people that he would consider.
And among the ones that he has suggested are people who would reverse Roe v. Wade and reverse marriage equality.
I think that would be a terrible mistake and would take us backwards.
I want a Supreme Court that doesn't always side with corporate interests.
I want a Supreme Court that understands because you're wealthy and you can give more money to something doesn't mean you have any more rights or should have any more rights than anybody else.
So I have very clear views about what I want to see to kind of change the balance on the Supreme Court.
I think that was a dereliction of duty.
I hope that they will see their way to doing it, but if I am so fortunate enough as to be president, I will immediately move to make sure that we fill that, we have nine justices that get to work on behalf of our people.
Thank you, Secretary Clinton.
Thank you.
You're out of time.
Mr. Trump?
Justice Scalia, great judge, died recently.
And we have a vacancy.
I am looking to appoint judges very much in the mold of Justice Scalia.
I'm looking for judges -- and I've actually picked 20 of them so that people would see, highly respected, highly thought of, and actually very beautifully reviewed by just about everybody.
But people that will respect the Constitution of the United States.
And I think that this is so important.
They'll respect the Second Amendment and what it stands for, what it represents.
So important to me.
Now, Hillary mentioned something about contributions just so you understand.
So I will have in my race more than $100 million put in -- of my money, meaning I'm not taking all of this big money from all of these different corporations like she's doing.
What I ask is this.
So I'm putting in more than -- by the time it's finished, I'll have more than $100 million invested.
Pretty much self-funding money.
We're raising money for the Republican Party, and we're doing tremendously on the small donations, $61 average or so.
It's $30 million less for special interests that will tell you exactly what to do and it would really, I think, be a nice sign to the American public.
Why aren't you putting some money in?
You have a lot of it.
You've made a lot of it because of the fact that you've been in office.
Made a lot of it while you were secretary of state, actually.
So why aren't you putting money into your own campaign?
I'm just curious.
Well...
(CROSSTALK)
Thank you very much.
We're going to get on to one more question.
The question was about the Supreme Court.
And I just want to quickly say, I respect the Second Amendment.
But I believe there should be comprehensive background checks, and we should close the gun show loophole, and close the online loophole.
Thank you.
We have -- we have one more question, Mrs. Clinton.
We have to save as many lives as we possibly can.
We have one more question from Ken Bone about energy policy.
Ken?
What steps will your energy policy take to meet our energy needs, while at the same time remaining environmentally friendly and minimizing job loss for fossil power plant workers?
Mr. Trump, two minutes?
Absolutely.
I think it's such a great question, because energy is under siege by the Obama administration.
Under absolutely siege.
The EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, is killing these energy companies.
And foreign companies are now coming in buying our -- buying so many of our different plants and then re-jiggering the plant so that they can take care of their oil.
Now, I'm all for alternative forms of energy, including wind, including solar, et cetera.
But we need much more than wind and solar.
And you look at our miners.
There is a thing called clean coal.
Now we have natural gas and so many other things because of technology.
So good.
Especially when you have $20 trillion in debt.
I will bring our energy companies back.
They'll be able to compete.
They'll make money.
They'll pay off our national debt.
They'll pay off our tremendous budget deficits, which are tremendous.
But we are putting our energy companies out of business.
We have to bring back our workers.
We have to guard our energy companies.
We have to make it possible.
And all you have to do is go to a great place like West Virginia or places like Ohio, which is phenomenal, or places like Pennsylvania and you see what they're doing to the people, miners and others in the energy business.
It's a disgrace.
Your time is up.
Thank you.
It's an absolute disgrace.
Secretary Clinton, two minutes.
And actually -- well, that was very interesting.
First of all, China is illegally dumping steel in the United States and Donald Trump is buying it to build his buildings, putting steelworkers and American steel plants out of business.
That's something that I fought against as a senator and that I would have a trade prosecutor to make sure that we don't get taken advantage of by China on steel or anything else.
We are not dependent upon the Middle East.
But the Middle East still controls a lot of the prices.
So the price of oil has been way down.
And that has had a damaging effect on a lot of the oil companies, right?
We are, however, producing a lot of natural gas, which serves as a bridge to more renewable fuels.
And I think that's an important transition.
We've got to remain energy-independent.
It gives us much more power and freedom than to be worried about what goes on in the Middle East.
We have enough worries over there without having to worry about that.
So I have a comprehensive energy policy, but it really does include fighting climate change, because I think that is a serious problem.
And I support moving toward more clean, renewable energy as quickly as we can, because I think we can be the 21st century clean energy superpower and create millions of new jobs and businesses.
But I also want to be sure that we don't leave people behind.
That's why I'm the only candidate from the very beginning of this campaign who had a plan to help us revitalize coal country, because those coal miners and their fathers and their grandfathers, they dug that coal out.
A lot of them lost their lives.
They were injured, but they turned the lights on and they powered their factories.
I don't want to walk away from them.
So we've got to do something for them.
Secretary Clinton...
So we have to look at this comprehensively.
Your time is up.
And that's exactly what I have proposed.
I hope you will go to HillaryClinton.com and look at my entire policy.
Time is up.
We have time for one more...
We have...
One more audience question.
We've sneaked in one more question, and it comes from Karl Becker.
Good evening.
My question to both of you is, regardless of the current rhetoric, would either of you name one positive thing that you respect in one another?
(APPLAUSE)
Mr. Trump, would you like to go first?
Well, I certainly will, because I think that's a very fair and important question.
Look, I respect his children.
His children are incredibly able and devoted, and I think that says a lot about Donald.
I don't agree with nearly anything else he says or does, but I do respect that.
And I think that is something that as a mother and a grandmother is very important to me.
So I believe that this election has become in part so -- so conflict-oriented, so intense because there's a lot at stake.
This is not an ordinary time, and this is not an ordinary election.
We are going to be choosing a president who will set policy for not just four or eight years, but because of some of the important decisions we have to make here at home and around the world, from the Supreme Court to energy and so much else, and so there is a lot at stake.
It's one of the most consequential elections that we've had.
And that's why I've tried to put forth specific policies and plans, trying to get it off of the personal and put it on to what it is I want to do as president.
And that's why I hope people will check on that for themselves so that they can see that, yes, I've spent 30 years, actually maybe a little more, working to help kids and families.
And I want to take all that experience to the White House and do that every single day.
Mr. Trump?
Well, I consider her statement about my children to be a very nice compliment.
I don't know if it was meant to be a compliment, but it is a great -- I'm very proud of my children.
And they've done a wonderful job, and they've been wonderful, wonderful kids.
So I consider that a compliment.
I will say this about Hillary.
She doesn't quit.
She doesn't give up.
I respect that.
I tell it like it is.
She's a fighter.
I disagree with much of what she's fighting for.
I do disagree with her judgment in many cases.
But she does fight hard, and she doesn't quit, and she doesn't give up.
And I consider that to be a very good trait.
Thanks to both of you.
We want to thank both the candidates.
We want to thank the university here.
This concludes the town hall meeting.
Our thanks to the candidates, the commission, Washington University, and to everybody who watched.
Please tune in on October 19th for the final presidential debate that will take place at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
Good night, everyone.
Good evening from the Thomas and Mack Center at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
I'm Chris Wallace of Fox News, and I welcome you to the third and final of the 2016 presidential debates between Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.
This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
The commission has designed the format: Six roughly 15-minute segments with two-minute answers to the first question, then open discussion for the rest of each segment.
Both campaigns have agreed to those rules.
For the record, I decided the topics and the questions in each topic.
None of those questions has been shared with the commission or the two candidates.
The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent.
No cheers, boos, or other interruptions so we and you can focus on what the candidates have to say.
No noise, except right now, as we welcome the Democratic nominee for president, Secretary Clinton, and the Republican nominee for president, Mr. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump, welcome.
Let's get right to it.
The first topic is the Supreme Court.
You both talked briefly about the court in the last debate, but I want to drill down on this, because the next president will almost certainly have at least one appointment and likely or possibly two or three appointments.
Which means that you will, in effect, determine the balance of the court for what could be the next quarter century.
First of all, where do you want to see the court take the country?
And secondly, what's your view on how the Constitution should be interpreted?
Do the founders' words mean what they say or is it a living document to be applied flexibly according to changing circumstances?
In this segment, Secretary Clinton, you go first.
You have two minutes.
Thank you very much, Chris.
And thanks to UNLV for hosting us.
You know, I think when we talk about the Supreme Court, it really raises the central issue in this election, namely, what kind of country are we going to be?
What kind of opportunities will we provide for our citizens?
What kind of rights will Americans have?
And I feel strongly that the Supreme Court needs to stand on the side of the American people, not on the side of the powerful corporations and the wealthy.
I have major disagreements with my opponent about these issues and others that will be before the Supreme Court.
But I feel that at this point in our country's history, it is important that we not reverse marriage equality, that we not reverse Roe v. Wade, that we stand up against Citizens United, we stand up for the rights of people in the workplace, that we stand up and basically say: The Supreme Court should represent all of us.
That's how I see the court, and the kind of people that I would be looking to nominate to the court would be in the great tradition of standing up to the powerful, standing up on behalf of our rights as Americans.
And I look forward to having that opportunity.
I would hope that the Senate would do its job and confirm the nominee that President Obama has sent to them.
That's the way the Constitution fundamentally should operate.
The president nominates, and then the Senate advises and consents, or not, but they go forward with the process.
Secretary Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump, same question.
Where do you want to see the court take the country?
And how do you believe the Constitution should be interpreted?
Well, first of all, it's great to be with you, and thank you, everybody.
The Supreme Court: It's what it's all about.
Our country is so, so -- it's just so imperative that we have the right justices.
We need a Supreme Court that in my opinion is going to uphold the Second Amendment, and all amendments, but the Second Amendment, which is under absolute siege.
But I feel that it's absolutely important that we uphold, because of the fact that it is under such trauma.
I feel that the justices that I am going to appoint -- and I've named 20 of them -- the justices that I'm going to appoint will be pro-life.
They will have a conservative bent.
They will be protecting the Second Amendment.
They are great scholars in all cases, and they're people of tremendous respect.
They will interpret the Constitution the way the founders wanted it interpreted.
And I believe that's very, very important.
I don't think we should have justices appointed that decide what they want to hear.
It's all about the Constitution of -- of -- and so important, the Constitution the way it was meant to be.
And those are the people that I will appoint.
Mr. Trump, thank you.
We now have about 10 minutes for an open discussion.
I want to focus on two issues that, in fact, by the justices that you name could end up changing the existing law of the land.
First is one that you mentioned, Mr. Trump, and that is guns.
Secretary Clinton, you said last year, let me quote, "The Supreme Court is wrong on the Second Amendment."
And now, in fact, in the 2008 Heller case, the court ruled that there is a constitutional right to bear arms, but a right that is reasonably limited.
Those were the words of the Judge Antonin Scalia who wrote the decision.
What's wrong with that?
Well, first of all, I support the Second Amendment.
I lived in Arkansas for 18 wonderful years.
I represented upstate New York.
I understand and respect the tradition of gun ownership.
It goes back to the founding of our country.
But I also believe that there can be and must be reasonable regulation.
Because I support the Second Amendment doesn't mean that I want people who shouldn't have guns to be able to threaten you, kill you or members of your family.
I think we need comprehensive background checks, need to close the online loophole, close the gun show loophole.
There's other matters that I think are sensible that are the kind of reforms that would make a difference that are not in any way conflicting with the Second Amendment.
You mentioned the Heller decision.
And the court didn't accept that reasonable regulation, but they've accepted many others.
So I see no conflict between saving people's lives and defending the Second Amendment.
Let me bring Mr. Trump in here.
The bipartisan Open Debate Coalition got millions of votes on questions to ask here, and this was, in fact, one of the top questions that they got.
How will you ensure the Second Amendment is protected?
You just heard Secretary Clinton's answer.
Does she persuade you that, while you may disagree on regulation, that, in fact, she supports a Second Amendment right to bear arms?
I watched.
And Justice Scalia was so involved.
And people that believe in the Second Amendment and believe in it very strongly were very upset with what she had to say.
Well, let me bring in Secretary Clinton.
Were you extremely upset?
But there's no doubt that I respect the Second Amendment, that I also believe there's an individual right to bear arms.
That is not in conflict with sensible, commonsense regulation.
And, you know, look, I understand that Donald's been strongly supported by the NRA.
The gun lobby's on his side.
They're running millions of dollars of ads against me.
And I regret that, because what I would like to see is for people to come together and say: Of course we're going to protect and defend the Second Amendment.
But we're going to do it in a way that tries to save some of these 33,000 lives that we lose every year.
Let me bring Mr. Trump back into this, because, in fact, you oppose any limits on assault weapons, any limits on high- capacity magazines.
You support a national right to carry law.
Why, sir?
Well, let me just tell you before we go any further.
I am a very strong supporter of the Second Amendment.
And I am -- I don't know if Hillary was saying it in a sarcastic manner, but I'm very proud to have the endorsement of the NRA.
And it's the earliest endorsement they've ever given to anybody who ran for president.
So I'm very honored by all of that.
We are going to appoint justices -- this is the best way to help the Second Amendment.
We are going to appoint justices that will feel very strongly about the Second Amendment, that will not do damage to the Second Amendment.
Well, let's pick up on another issue which divides you and the justices that whoever ends up winning this election appoints could have a dramatic effect there, and that's the issue of abortion.
Right.
Mr. Trump, you're pro-life.
But I want to ask you specifically: Do you want the court, including the justices that you will name, to overturn Roe v. Wade, which includes -- in fact, states -- a woman's right to abortion?
Well, if that would happen, because I am pro-life, and I will be appointing pro-life judges, I would think that that will go back to the individual states.
But I'm asking you specifically.
Would you like to...
If they overturned it, it will go back to the states.
But what I'm asking you, sir, is, do you want to see the court overturn -- you just said you want to see the court protect the Second Amendment.
Do you want to see the court overturn Roe v. Wade?
I will say this: It will go back to the states, and the states will then make a determination.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, I strongly support Roe v. Wade, which guarantees a constitutional right to a woman to make the most intimate, most difficult, in many cases, decisions about her health care that one can imagine.
And in this case, it's not only about Roe v. Wade.
It is about what's happening right now in America.
Donald has said he's in favor of defunding Planned Parenthood.
He even supported shutting the government down to defund Planned Parenthood.
I will defend Planned Parenthood.
I will defend Roe v. Wade, and I will defend women's rights to make their own health care decisions.
Secretary Clinton
And we have come too far to have that turned back now.
And I could just not be more opposed to that kind of thinking.
I'm going to give you a chance to respond, but I want to ask you, Secretary Clinton, I want to explore how far you believe the right to abortion goes.
You also voted against a ban on late-term, partial-birth abortions.
Why?
Because Roe v. Wade very clearly sets out that there can be regulations on abortion so long as the life and the health of the mother are taken into account.
And when I voted as a senator, I did not think that that was the case.
The kinds of cases that fall at the end of pregnancy are often the most heartbreaking, painful decisions for families to make.
I have met with women who toward the end of their pregnancy get the worst news one could get, that their health is in jeopardy if they continue to carry to term or that something terrible has happened or just been discovered about the pregnancy.
I do not think the United States government should be stepping in and making those most personal of decisions.
So you can regulate if you are doing so with the life and the health of the mother taken into account.
Mr. Trump, your reaction?
And particularly on this issue of late-term, partial-birth abortions.
Well, I think it's terrible.
Now, you can say that that's OK and Hillary can say that that's OK.
And that's not acceptable.
Well, that is not what happens in these cases.
And using that kind of scare rhetoric is just terribly unfortunate.
You should meet with some of the women that I have met with, women I have known over the course of my life.
This is one of the worst possible choices that any woman and her family has to make.
And I do not believe the government should be making it.
You know, I've had the great honor of traveling across the world on behalf of our country.
I've been to countries where governments either forced women to have abortions, like they used to do in China, or forced women to bear children, like they used to do in Romania.
And I can tell you: The government has no business in the decisions that women make with their families in accordance with their faith, with medical advice.
And I will stand up for that right.
All right.
But just briefly, I want to move on to another segment...
And, honestly, nobody has business doing what I just said, doing that, as late as one or two or three or four days prior to birth.
Nobody has that.
All right.
Let's move on to the subject of immigration.
And there is almost no issue that separates the two of you more than the issue of immigration.
Actually, there are a lot of issues that separate the two of you.
Mr. Trump, you want to build a wall.
Mr. Trump, you are calling for major deportations.
Secretary Clinton, you say that within your first 100 days as president you're going to offer a package that includes a pathway to citizenship.
The question, really, is, why are you right and your opponent wrong?
Mr. Trump, you go first in this segment.
You have two minutes.
We need strong borders.
In the audience tonight, we have four mothers of -- I mean, these are unbelievable people that I've gotten to know over a period of years whose children have been killed, brutally killed by people that came into the country illegally.
You have thousands of mothers and fathers and relatives all over the country.
They're coming in illegally.
Drugs are pouring in through the border.
We have no country if we have no border.
It means their job is tougher.
But they know what's going on.
They know it better than anybody.
They want strong borders.
They feel we have to have strong borders.
I was up in New Hampshire the other day.
The biggest complaint they have -- it's with all of the problems going on in the world, many of the problems caused by Hillary Clinton and by Barack Obama.
It's poisoning the blood of their youth and plenty of other people.
We have to have strong borders.
We have to keep the drugs out of our country.
We are -- right now, we're getting the drugs, they're getting the cash.
We need strong borders.
We need absolute -- we cannot give amnesty.
Now, I want to build the wall.
We stop the drugs.
We shore up the border.
One of my first acts will be to get all of the drug lords, all of the bad ones -- we have some bad, bad people in this country that have to go out.
We're going to get them out; we're going to secure the border.
And once the border is secured, at a later date, we'll make a determination as to the rest.
Mr. Trump, thank you.
Same question to you, Secretary Clinton.
Basically, why are you right and Mr. Trump is wrong?
Well, as he was talking, I was thinking about a young girl I met here in Las Vegas, Carla, who is very worried that her parents might be deported, because she was born in this country but they were not.
They work hard, they do everything they can to give her a good life.
And you're right.
I don't want to rip families apart.
I don't want to be sending parents away from children.
I don't want to see the deportation force that Donald has talked about in action in our country.
We have 11 million undocumented people.
They have 4 million American citizen children, 15 million people.
Now, here's what that means.
I think that is an idea that is not in keeping with who we are as a nation.
I think it's an idea that would rip our country apart.
I have been for border security for years.
I voted for border security in the United States Senate.
And my comprehensive immigration reform plan of course includes border security.
But I want to put our resources where I think they're most needed: Getting rid of any violent person.
Anybody who should be deported, we should deport them.
So I think we are both a nation of immigrants and we are a nation of laws and that we can act accordingly.
And that's why I'm introducing comprehensive immigration reform within the first 100 days with the path to citizenship.
Thank you, Secretary Clinton.
I want to follow up...
Chris, I think it's...
OK.
I think I should respond to that.
First of all, I had a very good meeting with the president of Mexico.
Very nice man.
We will be doing very much better with Mexico on trade deals.
Believe me.
Well, let me -- wait, wait, sir, let me...
We are a country of laws.
We either have -- and by the way...
Now, wait.
I'd like to hear from...
Well -- well, but she said one thing.
I'd like to hear -- I'd like to hear from Secretary Clinton.
And the wall.
But it is clear, when you look at what Donald has been proposing, he started his campaign bashing immigrants, calling Mexican immigrants rapists and criminals and drug dealers, that he has a very different view about what we should do to deal with immigrants.
Mr. Trump?
She doesn't want to say that, but that's what's happened, and that's what happened big league.
As far as moving these people out and moving -- we either have a country or we don't.
We're a country of laws.
We either have a border or we don't.
Now, you can come back in and you can become a citizen.
But it's very unfair.
We have millions of people that did it the right way.
They're on line.
They're waiting.
We're going to speed up the process, big league, because it's very inefficient.
But they're on line and they're waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs across the border, becomes a citizen, under her plan, you have open borders.
You would have a disaster on trade, and you will have a disaster with your open borders.
I want to...
Secretary Clinton, I want to...
That is...
Well, let me -- Secretary...
That is a rank mischaracterization.
Secretary Clinton...
We will have secure borders, but we'll also have reform.
And this used to be a bipartisan issue.
Ronald Reagan was the last president...
Secretary Clinton, excuse me.
Secretary Clinton.
... to sign immigration reform, and George W. Bush supported it, as well.
Secretary Clinton, I want to clear up your position on this issue, because in a speech you gave to a Brazilian bank, for which you were paid $225,000, we've learned from the WikiLeaks, that you said this, and I want to quote.
My dream is a hemispheric common market with open trade and open borders.
So that's the question...
Thank you.
That's the question.
Please quiet, everybody.
Is that your dream, open borders?
You know, we trade more energy with our neighbors than we trade with the rest of the world combined.
And I do want us to have an electric grid, an energy system that crosses borders.
I think that would be a great benefit to us.
But you are very clearly quoting from WikiLeaks.
And what's really important about WikiLeaks is that the Russian government has engaged in espionage against Americans.
They have hacked American websites, American accounts of private people, of institutions.
Then they have given that information to WikiLeaks for the purpose of putting it on the Internet.
So I actually think the most important question of this evening, Chris, is, finally, will Donald Trump admit and condemn that the Russians are doing this and make it clear that he will not have the help of Putin in in this election, that he rejects Russian espionage against Americans, which he actually encouraged in the past?
Those are the questions we need answered.
We've never had anything like this happen in any of our elections before.
Well?
How did we get on to Putin?
Hold on -- hold on, wait.
Hold on, folks.
Because we -- this is going to end up getting out of control.
Let's try to keep it quiet so -- for the candidates and for the American people.
So just to finish on the borders...
Yes?
People are going to pour into our country.
And you see, we are going to stop radical Islamic terrorism in this country.
She won't even mention the words, and neither will President Obama.
Now we can talk about Putin.
If we got along well, that would be good.
If Russia and the United States got along well and went after ISIS, that would be good.
He has no respect for her.
And she's playing chicken.
Look, Putin...
Wait, but...
... from everything I see, has no respect for this person.
Well, that's because he'd rather have a puppet as president of the United States.
No puppet.
No puppet.
And it's pretty clear...
You're the puppet!
It's pretty clear you won't admit...
No, you're the puppet.
So I think that this is such an unprecedented situation.
We've never had a foreign government trying to interfere in our election.
I find that deeply disturbing.
Secretary Clinton...
And I think it's time you take a stand...
I am not quoting myself.
I am quoting
Hillary, you have no idea.
... 17 intelligence -- do you doubt 17 military and civilian...
... agencies.
Yeah, I doubt it.
I doubt it.
Well, he'd rather believe Vladimir Putin than the military and civilian intelligence professionals who are sworn to protect us.
I find that just absolutely...
(CROSSTALK)
She doesn't like Putin because Putin has outsmarted her at every step of the way.
Mr. Trump...
Excuse me.
Putin has outsmarted her in Syria.
Mr. Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
He's outsmarted her every step of the way.
I do get to ask some questions.
Yes, that's fine.
And I would like to ask you this direct question.
The top national security officials of this country do believe that Russia has been behind these hacks.
Even if you don't know for sure whether they are, do you condemn any interference by Russia in the American election?
By Russia or anybody else.
You condemn their interference?
Of course I condemn.
Of course I -- I don't know Putin.
I have no idea.
I'm not asking -- I'm asking do you condemn?
I never met Putin.
This is not my best friend.
But if the United States got along with Russia, wouldn't be so bad.
Let me tell you, Putin has outsmarted her and Obama at every single step of the way.
Whether it's Syria, you name it.
Missiles.
Take a look at the "start up" that they signed.
The Russians can't believe it.
And all you have to do is look at the Middle East.
They've taken over.
We've spent $6 trillion.
They've taken over the Middle East.
She has been outsmarted and outplayed worse than anybody I've ever seen in any government whatsoever.
We're a long way away from immigration, but I'm going to let you finish this topic.
You got about 45 seconds.
And she always will be.
But here's the deal.
The bottom line on nuclear weapons is that when the president gives the order, it must be followed.
There's about four minutes between the order being given and the people responsible for launching nuclear weapons to do so.
And that's why 10 people who have had that awesome responsibility have come out and, in an unprecedented way, said they would not trust Donald Trump with the nuclear codes or to have his finger on the nuclear button.
200 generals
Very quickly.
... and admirals, 21 endorsing me, 21 congressional Medal of Honor recipients.
As far as Japan and other countries, we are being ripped off by everybody in the -- we're defending other countries.
We are spending a fortune doing it.
They have the bargain of the century.
We cannot continue to afford -- she took that as saying nuclear weapons.
OK.
Look, she's been proven to be a liar on so many different ways.
This is just another lie.
Well, I'm just quoting you when you were asked...
That kind...
... of language -- well...
The United States has kept the peace -- the United States has kept the peace through our alliances.
Donald wants to tear up our alliances.
I think it makes the world safer and, frankly, it makes the United States safer.
I would work with our allies in Asia, in Europe, in the Middle East, and elsewhere.
That's the only way we're going to be able to keep the peace.
We're going to -- no, we are going to move on to the next topic, which is the economy.
And I hope we handle that as well as we did immigration.
You also have very different ideas about how to get the economy growing faster.
Secretary Clinton, in your plan, government plays a big role.
You see more government spending, more entitlements, more tax credits, more tax penalties.
Mr. Trump, you want to get government out with lower taxes and less regulation.
Yes.
We're going to drill down into this a little bit more.
But in this overview, please explain to me why you believe that your plan will create more jobs and growth for this country and your opponent's plan will not.
In this round, you go first, Secretary Clinton.
When the middle class grows, America grows
And so my plan is based on growing the economy, giving middle-class families many more opportunities.
I think we can compete with high-wage countries, and I believe we should.
New jobs and clean energy, not only to fight climate change, which is a serious problem, but to create new opportunities and new businesses.
I want us to do more to help small business.
That's where two- thirds of the new jobs are going to come from.
I want us to raise the national minimum wage, because people who live in poverty should not -- who work full-time should not still be in poverty.
And I sure do want to make sure women get equal pay for the work we do.
I feel strongly that we have to have an education system that starts with preschool and goes through college.
That's why I want more technical education in high schools and in community colleges, real apprenticeships to prepare young people for the jobs of the future.
And we're going to work hard to make sure that it is, because we are going to go where the money is.
Most of the gains in the last years since the Great Recession have gone to the very top.
So we are going to have the wealthy pay their fair share.
We're going to have corporations make a contribution greater than they are now to our country.
Why?
So the plan I have I think will actually produce greater opportunities.
The plan he has will cost us jobs and possibly lead to another Great Recession.
Secretary, thank you.
Mr. Trump, why will your plan create more jobs and growth than Secretary Clinton's?
Her tax plan is a disaster.
And she can say all she wants about college tuition.
And I'm a big proponent.
We're going to do a lot of things for college tuition.
But the rest of the public's going to be paying for it.
Why aren't they paying?
She immediately -- when she heard this, I questioned it, and I questioned NATO.
Why aren't the NATO questioned -- why aren't they paying?
Because they weren't paying.
We're protecting people, they have to pay up.
And I'm a big fan of NATO.
She comes out and said, we love our allies, we think our allies are great.
Well, it's awfully hard to get them to pay up when you have somebody saying we think how great they are.
We're up to $20 trillion.
So my plan -- we're going to renegotiate trade deals.
We're going to have a lot of free trade.
We're going to have free trade, more free trade than we have right now.
But we have horrible deals.
Our jobs are being taken out by the deal that her husband signed, NAFTA, one of the worst deals ever.
We're bringing our jobs back.
I am going to renegotiate NAFTA.
And if I can't make a great deal -- then we're going to terminate NAFTA and we're going to create new deals.
We're going to have trade, but we're going -- we're going to terminate it, we're going to make a great trade deal.
And if we can't, we're going to do it -- we're going to go a separate way, because it has been a disaster.
We are going to cut taxes massively.
We're going to cut business taxes massively.
They're going to start hiring people.
We're going to bring the $2.5 trillion...
Time, Mr. Trump.
... that's offshore back into the country.
We are going to start the engine rolling again, because...
Mr. Trump?
... right now, our country is dying at 1 percent GDP.
Well, let me translate that, if I can, Chris, because...
You can't.
I have said repeatedly throughout this campaign: I will not raise taxes on anyone making $250,000 or less.
Well, he mentioned the debt.
We know how to get control of the debt.
So, yes, one of the ways you go after the debt, one of the ways you create jobs is by investing in people.
So I do have investments, investments in new jobs, investments in education, skill training, and the opportunities for people to get ahead and stay ahead.
That's the kind of approach that will work.
Secretary...
Cutting taxes on the wealthy, we've tried that.
It has not worked the way that it has been promised.
Correct.
Thank you, sir.
You told me in July when we spoke that the problem is that President Obama didn't get to do enough in what he was trying to do with his stimulus.
So is your plan basically more -- even more of the Obama stimulus?
Well, it's a combination, Chris.
And let me say that when you inherit the level of economic catastrophe that President Obama inherited, it was a real touch-and-go situation.
I was in the Senate before I became secretary of state.
I've never seen people as physically distraught as the Bush administration team was because of what was happening to the economy.
He doesn't get the credit he deserves for taking some very hard positions.
But it was a terrible recession.
So now we've dug ourselves out of it, we're standing, but we're not yet running.
So what I am proposing is that we invest from the middle out and the ground up, not the top down.
That is not going to work.
We've got to do more to get the whole economy moving, and that's what I believe I will be able to do.
Mr. Trump, even conservative economists who have looked at your plan say that the numbers don't add up, that your idea, and you've talked about 25 million jobs created, 4 percent...
Over a 10-year period.
... growth is unrealistic.
And they say -- you talk a lot about growing the energy industry.
They say with oil prices as low as they are right now, that's unrealistic, as well.
Your response, sir?
So I just left some high representatives of India.
And that for them is a catastrophically low number.
In fact I said, is that the last jobs report before the election?
Because if it is, I should win easily, it was so bad.
The report was so bad.
Our product is pouring in from China, pouring in from Vietnam, pouring in from all over the world.
I've visited so many communities.
This has been such an incredible education for me, Chris.
I've gotten to know so many -- I've developed so many friends over the last year.
And they cry when they see what's happened.
I pass factories that were thriving 20, 25 years ago, and because of the bill that her husband signed and she blessed 100 percent, it is just horrible what's happened to these people in these communities.
Now, she can say that her husband did well, but, boy, did they suffer as NAFTA kicked in, because it didn't really kick in very much, but it kicked in after they left.
Boy, did they suffer.
That was one of the worst things that's ever been signed by our country.
And she wants it.
She totally lied.
She did call it the gold standard.
I was so honored.
I want you to give you a chance to briefly speak to that, and then I want to pivot to one-sixth of the economy...
And that will be as bad as NAFTA.
... which is Obamacare.
But go ahead, briefly.
I've had the same test.
Does it create jobs, raise incomes, and further our national security?
I'm against it now.
I'll be against it after the election.
I'll be against it when I'm president.
He's shipped jobs to 12 countries, including Mexico.
But he mentioned China.
I have fought against that as a senator.
I've stood up against it as secretary of state.
So he goes around with crocodile tears about how terrible it is, but he has given jobs to Chinese steelworkers, not American steelworkers.
Mr. Trump?
That's the kind of approach that is just not going to work.
Well, let me just say -- let me just say.
We're going to pull the country together.
We're going to have trade agreements that we enforce.
That's why I'm going to have a trade prosecutor for the first time in history.
And we're going to enforce those agreements, and we're going to look for businesses to help us by buying American products.
Secretary Clinton?
Go ahead, Mr. Trump.
Let me ask a simple question.
She's been doing this for 30 years.
Why the hell didn't you do it over the last 15, 20 years?
No, I voted.
You were very much involved -- excuse me.
My turn.
You were very much involved in every aspect of this country.
Very much.
And you do have experience.
I say the one thing you have over me is experience, but it's bad experience, because what you've done has turned out badly.
For 30 years, you've been in a position to help, and if you say that I use steel or I use something else, I -- make it impossible for me to do that.
I wouldn't mind.
The problem is, you talk, but you don't get anything done, Hillary.
You don't.
If you become president, this country is going to be in some mess.
Believe me.
Well, first of all, what he just said about the State Department is not only untrue, it's been debunked numerous times.
But I think it's really an important issue.
He raised the 30 years of experience, so let me just talk briefly about that.
You know, back in the 1970s, I worked for the Children's Defense Fund.
And I was taking on discrimination against African-American kids in schools.
In the 1980s, I was working to reform the schools in Arkansas.
In the 1990s, I went to Beijing and I said women's rights are human rights.
He insulted a former Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, called her an eating machine.
Give me a break.
And on the day when I was in the Situation Room, monitoring the raid that brought Osama bin Laden to justice, he was hosting the "Celebrity Apprentice."
So I'm happy to compare my 30 years of experience, what I've done for this country, trying to help in every way I could, especially kids and families get ahead and stay ahead, with your 30 years, and I'll let the American people make that decision.
Well, I think I did a much better job.
I agree with that.
It's a $1 million loan.
But I built a phenomenal company.
And if we could run our country the way I've run my company, we would have a country that you would be so proud of.
You would even be proud of it.
And frankly, when you look at her real record, take a look at Syria.
Take a look at the migration.
Take a look at Libya.
Take a look at Iraq.
She gave us ISIS as sure as you are sitting there.
And now I listen how she's going to get rid of ISIS.
She's going to get rid of nobody.
All right.
We are going to get to foreign hot spots in a few moments, but the next segment is fitness to be president of the United States.
Mr. Trump, at the last debate, you said your talk about grabbing women was just that, talk, and that you'd never actually done it.
Why would so many different women from so many different circumstances over so many different years, why would they all in this last couple of weeks make up -- you deny this -- why would they all make up these stories?
Since this is a question for both of you, Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump says what your husband did and that you defended was even worse.
Mr. Trump, you go first.
I have a feeling how they came.
I believe it was her campaign that did it.
I would say the only way -- because those stories are all totally false, I have to say that.
And I didn't even apologize to my wife, who's sitting right here, because I didn't do anything.
I didn't know any of these -- I didn't see these women.
These women -- the woman on the plane, the -- I think they want either fame or her campaign did it.
And I think it's her campaign.
I believe, Chris, that she got these people to step forward.
If it wasn't, they get their 10 minutes of fame.
But they were all totally -- it was all fiction.
It was lies, and it was fiction.
Well...
Secretary Clinton?
At the last debate, we heard Donald talking about what he did to women.
And after that, a number of women have come forward saying that's exactly what he did to them.
Now, what was his response?
In fact, he went on to say...
Her two minutes -- sir, her two minutes.
Her two minutes.
I did not say that.
It's her two minutes.
He went on to say, "Look at her.
I don't think so."
About another woman, he said, "That wouldn't be my first choice."
He attacked the woman reporter writing the story, called her "disgusting," as he has called a number of women during this campaign.
Donald thinks belittling women makes him bigger.
He goes after their dignity, their self-worth, and I don't think there is a woman anywhere who doesn't know what that feels like.
So we now know what Donald thinks and what he says and how he acts toward women.
That's who Donald is.
I think it's really up to all of us to demonstrate who we are and who our country is, and to stand up and be very clear about what we expect from our next president, how we want to bring our country together, where we don't want to have the kind of pitting of people one against the other, where instead we celebrate our diversity, we lift people up, and we make our country even greater.
America is great, because America is good.
And it really is up to all of us to make that true, now and in the future, and particularly for our children and our grandchildren.
Mr. Trump...
Nobody has more respect for women than I do.
Nobody.
(LAUGHTER)
Nobody has more respect...
Please, everybody.
And frankly, those stories have been largely debunked.
And I really want to just talk about something slightly different.
She mentions this, which is all fiction, all fictionalized, probably or possibly started by her and her very sleazy campaign.
What happened to the FBI, I don't know.
He's going to probably go to jail.
This is a four-star general.
And she gets away with it, and she can run for the presidency of the United States?
That's really what you should be talking about, not fiction, where somebody wants fame or where they come out of her crooked campaign.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, every time Donald is pushed on something which is obviously uncomfortable, like what these women are saying, he immediately goes to denying responsibility.
And it's not just about women.
So we know what he has said and what he's done to women.
So it's not one thing.
This is a pattern, a pattern of divisiveness, of a very dark and in many ways dangerous vision of our country, where he incites violence, where he applauds people who are pushing and pulling and punching at his rallies.
That is not who America is.
And I hope that as we move in the last weeks of this campaign, more and more people will understand what's at stake in this election.
It really does come down to what kind of country we are going to have.
So sad when she talks about violence at my rallies, and she caused the violence.
It's on tape.
During the last...
The other things are false, but honestly, I'd love to talk about getting rid of ISIS, and I'd love to talk about other things...
OK.
... but those other charges, as she knows, are false.
In this bucket about fitness to be president, there's been a lot of developments over the last 10 days since the last debate.
I'd like to ask you about them.
These are questions that the American people have.
Secretary Clinton, during your 2009 Senate confirmation hearing, you promised to avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest with your dealing with the Clinton Foundation while you were secretary of state, but e-mails show that donors got special access to you.
Those seeking grants for Haiti relief were considered separately from non-donors, and some of those donors got contracts, government contracts, taxpayer money.
Can you really say that you kept your pledge to that Senate committee?
And why isn't what happened and what went on between you and the Clinton Foundation, why isn't it what Mr. Trump calls pay to play?
Well, everything I did as secretary of state was in furtherance of our country's interests and our values.
The State Department has said that.
I think that's been proven.
But I am happy, in fact I'm thrilled to talk about the Clinton Foundation, because it is a world-renowned charity and I am so proud of the work that it does.
You know, I could talk for the rest of the debate -- I know I don't have the time to do that.
In partnership with the American Health Association...
Secretary Clinton...
... we have made environments in schools healthier for kids, including healthier lunches...
Secretary Clinton, respectfully, this is -- this is an open discussion.
Well, it is an open discussion.
And you...
And the specific question went to pay for play.
Do you want to talk about that?
Well, but there is no -- but there is no evidence -- but there is...
(CROSSTALK)
I think that it's been very well...
Let's ask Mr. Trump.
There is a lot of evidence about the very good work...
It's been very well studied.
... and the high rankings...
(CROSSTALK)
Please let me Mr. Trump speak.
Please let Mr. Trump speak.
(CROSSTALK)
Saudi Arabia giving $25 million, Qatar, all of these countries.
You talk about women and women's rights?
So I'd like to ask you right now, why don't you give back the money that you've taken from certain countries that treat certain groups of people so horribly?
Why don't you give back the money?
I think it would be a great gesture.
Because she takes a tremendous amount of money.
And you take a look at the people of Haiti.
I was at a little Haiti the other day in Florida.
And I want to tell you, they hate the Clintons, because what's happened in Haiti with the Clinton Foundation is a disgrace.
And you know it, and they know it, and everybody knows it.
Secretary Clinton?
I'm very proud of that.
We have the highest rating from the watchdogs that follow foundations.
I mean, who does that?
It just was astonishing.
But when it comes to Haiti, Haiti is the poorest country in our hemisphere.
The earthquake and the hurricanes, it has devastated Haiti.
Bill and I have been involved in trying to help Haiti for many years.
The Clinton Foundation raised $30 million to help Haiti after the catastrophic earthquake and all of the terrible problems the people there had.
We have done things to help small businesses, agriculture, and so much else.
And we're going to keep working to help Haiti...
All right.
... because it's an important part of the American experience.
They don't want you to help them anymore.
(CROSSTALK)
I'd like to mention one thing.
Trump Foundation, small foundation.
I don't get anything.
What happens -- the money goes to them.
Wasn't some of the money used to settle your lawsuits, sir?
And that's it.
Right.
But there was a penalty that was imposed by Palm Beach County, and the money came from your foundation...
There was.
There was.
And, by the way
instead of Mar-a-Lago or yourself, sir.
I want to get into one...
But, of course, there's no way we can know whether any of that is true, because he hasn't released his tax returns.
You can look at our tax returns.
We've got them all out there.
And we were talking about immigrants a few minutes ago, Chris.
I find that just astonishing.
I want...
We...
Let me just explain.
But, no, we heard this...
Mr. Trump, we -- OK.
You know what she should have done?
Folks, we heard this...
And you know, Hillary, what you should have done, you should have changed the law when you were a United States senator...
Folks, we heard this...
... because your donors and your special interests are doing the same thing as I do, except even more so.
Well, you know...
You should have changed the law.
But you won't change the law, because you take in so much money.
I mean, I sat in my apartment today on a very beautiful hotel down the street known as Trump...
Made with Chinese steel.
But I will tell you, I sat there...
(LAUGHTER)
... I sat there watching ad after ad after ad, false ad.
All paid for by your friends on Wall Street that gave so much money because they know you're going to protect them.
And, frankly, you should have changed the laws.
Mr. Trump...
If you don't like what I did, you should have changed the laws.
Mr. Trump, I want to ask you about one last question in this topic.
Your running mate, Governor Pence, pledged on Sunday that he and you -- his words -- "will absolutely accept the result of this election."
Today your daughter, Ivanka, said the same thing.
I want to ask you here on the stage tonight: Do you make the same commitment that you will absolutely -- sir, that you will absolutely accept the result of this election?
I will look at it at the time.
I'm not looking at anything now.
I'll look at it at the time.
What I've seen -- what I've seen is so bad.
First of all, the media is so dishonest and so corrupt, and the pile-on is so amazing.
The New York Times actually wrote an article about it, but they don't even care.
It's so dishonest.
And they've poisoned the mind of the voters.
But unfortunately for them, I think the voters are seeing through it.
I think they're going to see through it.
We'll find out on November 8th.
But I think they're going to see through it.
But, sir, there's...
So let me just give you one other thing.
So I talk about the corrupt media.
I talk about the millions of people -- tell you one other thing.
She shouldn't be allowed to run.
She should not be allowed to run.
But...
Chris, she should never have been allowed to run for the presidency based on what she did with e-mails and so many other things.
But, sir, there is a tradition in this country -- in fact, one of the prides of this country -- is the peaceful transition of power and that no matter how hard-fought a campaign is, that at the end of the campaign that the loser concedes to the winner.
Not saying that you're necessarily going to be the loser or the winner, but that the loser concedes to the winner and that the country comes together in part for the good of the country.
Are you saying you're not prepared now to commit to that principle?
What I'm saying is that I will tell you at the time.
I'll keep you in suspense.
OK?
Well, Chris, let me respond to that, because that's horrifying.
You know, every time Donald thinks things are not going in his direction, he claims whatever it is, is rigged against him.
The FBI conducted a year-long investigation into my e-mails.
They concluded there was no case; he said the FBI was rigged.
He lost the Iowa caucus.
He lost the Wisconsin primary.
Then Trump University gets sued for fraud and racketeering; he claims the court system and the federal judge is rigged against him.
Should have gotten it.
(LAUGHTER)
This is -- this is a mindset.
This is how Donald thinks.
And it's funny, but it's also really troubling.
OK.
So that is not the way our democracy works.
We've been around for 240 years.
We've had free and fair elections.
We've accepted the outcomes when we may not have liked them.
And that is what must be expected of anyone standing on a debate stage during a general election.
You know, President Obama said the other day when you're whining before the game is even finished...
(APPLAUSE)
Hold on.
Hold on, folks.
Hold on, folks.
... it just shows you're not up to doing the job.
And let's -- you know, let's be clear about what he is saying and what that means.
He is denigrating -- he's talking down our democracy.
And I, for one, am appalled that somebody who is the nominee of one of our two major parties would take that kind of position.
I think it's a disgrace.
All right.
I think we've never had a situation so bad in this country.
(APPLAUSE)
Hold on, folks.
This doesn't do any good for anyone.
Let's please continue the debate, and let's move on to the subject of foreign hot spots.
The Iraqi offensive to take back Mosul has begun.
If they are successful in pushing ISIS out of that city and out of all of Iraq, the question then becomes, what happens the day after?
And that's something that whichever of you ends up -- whoever of you ends up as president is going to have to confront.
Will you put U.S. troops into that vacuum to make sure that ISIS doesn't come back or isn't replaced by something even worse?
Secretary Clinton, you go first in this segment.
You have two minutes.
Well, I am encouraged that there is an effort led by the Iraqi army, supported by Kurdish forces, and also given the help and advice from the number of special forces and other Americans on the ground.
But I will not support putting American soldiers into Iraq as an occupying force.
I don't think that is in our interest, and I don't think that would be smart to do.
In fact, Chris, I think that would be a big red flag waving for ISIS to reconstitute itself.
The goal here is to take back Mosul.
It's going to be a hard fight.
I've got no illusions about that.
And then continue to press into Syria to begin to take back and move on Raqqa, which is the ISIS headquarters.
I am hopeful that the hard work that American military advisers have done will pay off and that we will see a real -- a really successful military operation.
But we know we've got lots of work to do.
Syria will remain a hotbed of terrorism as long as the civil war, aided and abetted by the Iranians and the Russians, continue.
So I have said, look, we need to keep our eye on ISIS.
That's why I want to have an intelligence surge that protects us here at home, why we have to go after them from the air, on the ground, online, why we have to make sure here at home we don't let terrorists buy weapons.
If you're too dangerous to fly, you're too dangerous to buy a gun.
And I'm going to continue to push for a no-fly zone and safe havens within Syria not only to help protect the Syrians and prevent the constant outflow of refugees, but to, frankly, gain some leverage on both the Syrian government and the Russians so that perhaps we can have the kind of serious negotiation necessary to bring the conflict to an end and go forward on a political track.
Mr. Trump, same question.
If we are able to push ISIS out of Mosul and out of Iraq, will -- would you be willing to put U.S. troops in there to prevent their return or something else?
Let me tell you, Mosul is so sad.
We had Mosul.
Now we're fighting again to get Mosul.
The problem with Mosul and what they wanted to do is they wanted to get the leaders of ISIS who they felt were in Mosul.
Whatever happened to the element of surprise, OK?
We announce we're going after Mosul.
They've all left.
The element of surprise.
Douglas MacArthur, George Patton spinning in their graves when they see the stupidity of our country.
So we're now fighting for Mosul, that we had.
But you know who the big winner in Mosul is going to be after we eventually get it?
And the only reason they did it is because she's running for the office of president and they want to look tough.
They want to look good.
He violated the red line in the sand, and he made so many mistakes, made all the mistakes.
That's why we have the great migration.
But she wanted to look good for the election.
So they're going in.
But who's going to get Mosul, really?
We'll take Mosul eventually.
But the way -- if you look at what's happening, much tougher than they thought.
Much, much tougher.
Much more dangerous.
Going to be more deaths that they thought.
But the leaders that we wanted to get are all gone because they're smart.
They say, what do we need this for?
So Mosul is going to be a wonderful thing.
Iran should write us yet another letter saying thank you very much, because Iran, as I said many years ago, Iran is taking over Iraq, something they've wanted to do forever, but we've made it so easy for them.
So we're now going to take Mosul.
And do you know who's going to be the beneficiary?
Iran.
Oh, yeah, they're making -- I mean, they are outsmarting -- look, you're not there, you might be involved in that decision.
But you were there when you took everybody out of Mosul and out of Iraq.
You shouldn't have been in Iraq, but you did vote for it.
You shouldn't have been in Iraq, but once you were in Iraq, you should have never left the way.
Sir, your two minutes are up.
The point is, the big winner is going to be Iran.
I said it was a mistake.
I've said that years ago.
He has consistently denied what is...
... a very clear fact that...
Wrong.
... before the invasion, he supported it.
And, you know, I just want everybody to go Google it.
Google "Donald Trump Iraq."
And you will see the dozens of sources which verify that he was for the invasion of Iraq.
Wrong.
And you can actually hear the audio of him saying that.
Now, why does that matter?
Well, it matters because he has not told the truth about that position.
I guess he believes it makes him look better now to contrast with me because I did vote for it.
But what's really important here is to understand all the interplay.
Mosul is a Sunni city.
Mosul is on the border of Syria.
And, yes, we do need to go after Baghdadi, and -- just like we went after bin Laden, while you were doing "Celebrity Apprentice," and we brought him to justice.
We need to go after the leadership.
But we need to get rid of them, get rid of their fighters.
There are an estimated several thousand fighters in Mosul.
They've been digging underground.
They've been prepared to defend.
It's going to be tough fighting.
But I think we can take back Mosul, and then we can move on into Syria and take back Raqqa.
This is what we have to do.
You know, he always is looking for some conspiracy.
He has all the conspiracy theories...
(CROSSTALK)
Secretary Clinton, it's...
(CROSSTALK)
This conspiracy theory, which he's been spewing out for quite some time.
If they did it by surprise...
(CROSSTALK)
Wait, wait, wait, Secretary Clinton, it's an open discussion.
He says...
(CROSSTALK)
We could have gained if they did it by surprise.
Secretary, please let Mr. Trump speak.
... unfit, and he proves it every time he talks.
No, you are the one that's unfit.
You know, WikiLeaks just actually came out -- John Podesta said some horrible things about you, and, boy, was he right.
He said some beauties.
And you know, Bernie Sanders, he said you have bad judgment.
You do.
If you think that was good, then you do.
Now, John Podesta said you have terrible instincts.
Bernie Sanders said you have bad judgment.
I agree with both.
Well, you should ask Bernie Sanders who he's supporting for president.
And he has said...
Which is a big mistake.
... as he has campaigned for me around the country, you are the most dangerous person to run for president in the modern history of America.
I think he's right.
Let's turn to Aleppo.
Mr. Trump, in the last debate, you were both asked about the situation in the Syrian city of Aleppo.
And I want to follow up on that, because you said several things in that debate which were not true, sir.
You said that Aleppo has basically fallen.
In fact, there -- in fact, there are...
It's a catastrophe.
I mean...
It's a catastrophe, but there...
... it's a mess.
There are a quarter of...
Have you seen it?
Have you seen it?
Sir...
Have you seen what's happening to Aleppo?
Sir, if I may finish my question...
OK, so it hasn't fallen.
Take a look at it.
Well, there are a quarter of a million people still living there and being slaughtered.
That's right.
And they are being slaughtered...
Yes.
... because of bad decisions.
If I may just finish here, and you also said that -- that Syria and Russia are busy fighting ISIS.
In fact, they have been the ones who've been bombing and shelling eastern Aleppo, and they just announced a humanitarian pause, in effect, admitting that they have been bombing and shelling Aleppo.
Would you like to clear that up, sir?
Well, Aleppo is a disaster.
It's a humanitarian nightmare.
But it has fallen from the -- from any standpoint.
I mean, what do you need, a signed document?
Take a look at Aleppo.
It is so sad when you see what's happened.
And a lot of this is because of Hillary Clinton, because what's happened is, by fighting Assad, who turned out to be a lot tougher than she thought, and now she's going to say, oh, he loves Assad, she's -- he's just much tougher and much smarter than her and Obama.
And everyone thought he was gone two years ago, three years ago.
He -- he aligned with Russia.
He now also aligned with Iran, who we made very powerful.
We gave them $150 billion back.
We give them $1.7 billion in cash.
I mean, cash.
Bundles of cash as big as this stage.
We gave them $1.7 billion.
Now they have -- he has aligned with Russia and with Iran.
They don't want ISIS, but they have other things, because we're backing -- we're backing rebels.
We don't know who the rebels are.
We're giving them lots of money, lots of everything.
We don't know who the rebels are.
And when and if -- and it's not going to happen, because you have Russia and you have Iran now.
But if they ever did overthrow Assad, you might end up with -- as bad as Assad is, and he's a bad guy, but you may very well end up with worse than Assad.
If she did nothing, we'd be in much better shape.
Let me...
Lots of luck, Hillary.
Thanks a lot for doing a great job.
Secretary Clinton, you have talked about -- and in the last debate and again today -- that you would impose a no-fly zone to try to protect the people of Aleppo and to stop the killing there.
President Obama has refused to do that because he fears it's going to draw us closer or deeper into the conflict.
And General Joseph Dunford, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, says you impose a no-fly zone, chances are you're going to get into a war -- his words -- with Syria and Russia.
So the question I have is, if you impose a no-fly zone -- first of all, how do you respond to their concerns?
Secondly, if you impose a no-fly zone and a Russian plane violates that, does President Clinton shoot that plane down?
Well, Chris, first of all, I think a no-fly zone could save lives and could hasten the end of the conflict.
I'm well aware of the really legitimate concerns that you have expressed from both the president and the general.
This would not be done just on the first day.
This would take a lot of negotiation.
And it would also take making it clear to the Russians and the Syrians that our purpose here was to provide safe zones on the ground.
We've had millions of people leave Syria and those millions of people inside Syria who have been dislocated.
So I think we could strike a deal and make it very clear to the Russians and the Syrians that this was something that we believe was in the best interests of the people on the ground in Syria, it would help us with our fight against ISIS.
But I want to respond to what Donald said about refugees.
He's made these claims repeatedly.
I am not going to let anyone into this country who is not vetted, who we do not have confidence in.
But I am not going to slam the door on women and children.
That picture of that little 4-year-old boy in Aleppo, with the blood coming down his face while he sat in an ambulance, is haunting.
And so we are going to do very careful, thorough vetting.
That does not solve our internal challenges with ISIS and our need to stop radicalization, to work with American Muslim communities who are on the front lines to identify and prevent attacks.
So let's be clear about what the threat is and how we are best going to be able to meet it.
And, yes, some of that threat emanates from over in Syria and Iraq, and we've got to keep fighting, and I will defeat ISIS, and some of it is we have to up our game and be much smarter here at home.
Folks, I want to get into our final segment.
But I just have to...
Real quick.
It's so ridiculous what she -- she will defeat ISIS.
We should have never let ISIS happen in the first place.
OK.
We should have -- wait one second.
They had a cease-fire three weeks ago.
A cease-fire, the United States, Russia, and Syria.
They are outplayed.
Now, she wasn't there.
I assume she had nothing to do with it.
But our country is so outplayed by Putin and Assad, and by the way -- and by Iran.
Nobody can believe how stupid our leadership is.
Mr. Trump, Secretary Clinton -- no, we need to move on to our final segment, and that is the national debt, which has not been discussed until tonight.
Our national debt, as a share of the economy, our GDP, is now 77 percent.
That's the highest since just after World War II.
But the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget says, Secretary Clinton, under your plan, debt would rise to 86 percent of GDP over the next 10 years.
Mr. Trump, under your plan, they say it would rise to 105 percent of GDP over the next 10 years.
The question is, why are both of you ignoring this problem?
Mr. Trump, you go first.
And we're bringing GDP from, really, 1 percent, which is what it is now, and if she got in, it will be less than zero.
But we're bringing it from 1 percent up to 4 percent.
And I actually think we can go higher than 4 percent.
I think you can go to 5 percent or 6 percent.
And if we do, you don't have to bother asking your question, because we have a tremendous machine.
We will have created a tremendous economic machine once again.
To do that, we're taking back jobs.
It's very sad.
But I'm going to create a -- the kind of a country that we were from the standpoint of industry.
We used to be there.
We've given it up.
We've become very, very sloppy.
We've had people that are political hacks making the biggest deals in the world, bigger than companies.
You take these big companies, these trade deals are far bigger than these companies, and yet we don't use our great leaders, many of whom back me and many of whom back Hillary, I must say.
But we don't use those people.
Those are the people -- these are the greatest negotiators in the world.
We have the greatest businesspeople in the world.
We have to use them to negotiate our trade deals.
We use political hacks.
We use people that get the position because they gave -- they made a campaign contribution and they're dealing with China and people that are very much smarter than they are.
So we have to use our great people.
But that being said, we will create an economic machine the likes of which we haven't seen in many decades.
And people, Chris, will again go back to work and they'll make a lot of money.
And we'll have companies that will grow and expand and start from new.
Secretary Clinton?
Well, first, when I hear Donald talk like that and know that his slogan is "Make America Great Again," I wonder when he thought America was great.
And before he rushes and says, "You know, before you and President Obama were there," I think it's important to recognize that he has been criticizing our government for decades.
You know, back in 1987, he took out a $100,000 ad in the New York Times, during the time when President Reagan was president, and basically said exactly what he just said now, that we were the laughingstock of the world.
He was criticizing President Reagan.
This is the way Donald thinks about himself, puts himself into, you know, the middle and says, "You know, I alone can fix it," as he said on the convention stage.
I take that very seriously, because I do think it's one of the issues we've got to come to grips with.
So when I talk about how we're going to pay for education, how we're going to invest in infrastructure, how we're going to get the cost of prescription drugs down, and a lot of the other issues that people talk to me about all the time, I've made it very clear we are going where the money is.
We are going to ask the wealthy and corporations to pay their fair share.
And there is no evidence whatsoever that that will slow down or diminish our growth.
In fact, I think just the opposite.
We'll have what economists call middle-out growth.
We've got to get back to rebuilding the middle class, the families of America.
That's where growth will come from.
That's why I want to invest in you.
I want to invest in your family.
And I think that's the smartest way to grow the economy, to make the economy fairer.
And we just have a big disagreement about this.
It may be because of our experiences.
You know, he started off with his dad as a millionaire...
Yeah, yeah, we've heard -- we've heard this before, Hillary.
I started off with -- my dad was a small-business man.
We've heard this before.
And I think it -- you know, it's a difference that affects how we see the world and what we want to do with the economy.
Time.
Thank you, Hillary.
Could I just respond?
Well, no, sir, because we're running out of time...
Because I did disagree with Ronald Reagan very strongly on trade.
I disagreed with him.
We should have been much tougher on trade even then.
I've been waiting for years.
Nobody does it right.
OK.
And frankly, now we're going to do it right.
All right.
The one last area I want to get into with you in this debate is the fact that the biggest driver of our debt is entitlements, which is 60 percent of all federal spending.
Now, the Committee for federal -- a Responsible Federal Budget has looked at both of your plans and they say neither of you has a serious plan that is going to solve the fact that Medicare's going to run out of money in the 2020s, Social Security is going to run out of money in the 2030s, and at that time, recipients are going to take huge cuts in their benefits.
So, in effect, the final question I want to ask you in this regard is -- and let me start with you, Mr. Trump, would President Trump make a deal to save Medicare and Social Security that included both tax increases and benefit cuts, in effect, a grand bargain on entitlements?
I'm cutting taxes.
We're going to grow the economy.
It's going to grow at a record rate of growth.
That's not going to help in the entitlements.
No, it's going to totally help you.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare.
You take a look at the kind of numbers that that will cost us in the year '17, it is a disaster.
If we don't repeal and replace -- now, it's probably going to die of its own weight.
But Obamacare has to go.
And I'm really glad that the premiums have started -- at least the people see what's happening, because she wants to keep Obamacare and she wants to make it even worse, and it can't get any worse.
Bad health care at the most expensive price.
We have to repeal and replace Obamacare.
And, Secretary Clinton, same question, because at this point, Social Security and Medicare are going to run out, the trust funds are going to run out of money.
Will you as president entertain -- will you consider a grand bargain, a deal that includes both tax increases and benefit cuts to try to save both programs?
Well, Chris, I am on record as saying that we need to put more money into the Social Security Trust Fund.
That's part of my commitment to raise taxes on the wealthy.
My Social Security payroll contribution will go up, as will Donald's, assuming he can't figure out how to get out of it.
But what we want to do is to replenish the Social Security Trust Fund...
Such a nasty woman.
... by making sure that we have sufficient resources, and that will come from either raising the cap and/or finding other ways to get more money into it.
I will not cut benefits.
I want to enhance benefits for low-income workers and for women who have been disadvantaged by the current Social Security system.
But what Donald is proposing with these massive tax cuts will result in a $20 trillion additional national debt.
That will have dire consequences for Social Security and Medicare.
And I'll say something about the Affordable Care Act, which he wants to repeal.
So if repeals it, our Medicare problem gets worse.
What we need to do is go after...
... the long-term health care drivers.
We've got to get costs down, increase value, emphasize wellness.
I have a plan for doing that.
And I think that we will be able to get entitlement spending under control by with more resources and harder decisions.
This is -- this is the final time, probably to both of your delight, that you're going to be on a stage together in this campaign.
I would like to end it on a positive note.
You had not agreed to closing statements, but it seems to me in a funny way that might make it more interesting because you haven't prepared closing statements.
So I'd like you each to take -- and we're going to put a clock up, a minute, as the final question in the final debate, to tell the American people why they should elect you to be the next president.
This is another new mini-segment.
Secretary Clinton, it's your turn to go first.
Well, I would like to say to everyone watching tonight that I'm reaching out to all Americans -- Democrats, Republicans, and independents -- because we need everybody to help make our country what it should be, to grow the economy, to make it fairer, to make it work for everyone.
We need your talents, your skills, your commitments, your energy, your ambition.
You know, I've been privileged to see the presidency up close.
And I know the awesome responsibility of protecting our country and the incredible opportunity of working to try to make life better for all of you.
I have made the cause of children and families really my life's work.
That's what my mission will be in the presidency.
I will stand up for families against powerful interests, against corporations.
I will do everything that I can to make sure that you have good jobs, with rising incomes, that your kids have good educations from preschool through college.
I hope you will give me a chance to serve as your president.
Secretary Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump?
She's raising the money from the people she wants to control.
Doesn't work that way.
But when I started this campaign, I started it very strongly.
It's called "Make America Great Again."
We're going to make America great.
We have a depleted military.
It has to be helped, has to be fixed.
We have the greatest people on Earth in our military.
We don't take care of our veterans.
That can't happen.
Our policemen and women are disrespected.
We need law and order, but we need justice, too.
I will do more for African-Americans and Latinos than she can ever do in 10 lifetimes.
All she's done is talk to the African-Americans and to the Latinos, but they get the vote, and then they come back, they say, we'll see you in four years.
We are going to make America strong again, and we are going to make America great again, and it has to start now.
We cannot take four more years of Barack Obama, and that's what you get when you get her.
Thank you both.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton -- hold on just a moment, folks.
Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump, I want to thank you both for participating in all three of these debates.
That brings to an end this year's debates sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
We want to thank the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and its students for having us.
Now the decision is up to you.
While millions have already voted, Election Day, November 8th, is just 20 days away.
One thing everyone here can agree on: We hope you will go vote.
It is one of the honors and obligations of living in this great country.
Thank you, and good night.
